Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure
Michael C. Jensen
Harvard Business School
MJensen@hbs.edu
And
William H. Meckling
University of Rochester
Abstract
This paper integrates elements from the theory of agency, the theory of property rights and the
theory of finance to develop a theory of the ownership structure of the firm. We define the concept
of agency costs, show its relationship to the ‘separation and control’ issue, investigate the nature
of the agency costs generated by the existence of debt and outside equity, demonstrate who bears
costs and why, and investigate the Pareto optimality of their existence. We also provide a new
definition of the firm, and show how our analysis of the factors influencing the creation and
issuance of debt and equity claims is a special case of the supply side of the completeness of
markets problem.
The directors of such [joint-stock] companies, however, being the managers rather of other
people’s money than of their own, it cannot well be expected, that they should watch over it with
the same anxious vigilance with which the partners in a private copartnery frequently watch over
their own. Like the stewards of a rich man, they are apt to consider attention to small matters as not
for their master’s honour, and very easily give themselves a dispensation from having it.
Negligence and profusion, therefore, must always prevail, more or less, in the management of the
affairs of such a company.
 —  Adam Smith (1776)
Keywords: Agency costs and theory, internal control systems, conflicts of interest, capital
structure, internal equity, outside equity, demand for security analysis, completeness of markets,
supply of claims, limited liability
 ©1976 Jensen and Meckling
Journal of Financial Economics, October, 1976, V. 3, No. 4, pp. 305-360.
Reprinted in Michael C. Jensen, A Theory of the Firm: Governance,
Residual Claims and Organizational Forms (Harvard University Press, December 2000)
 available at http://hupress.harvard.edu/catalog/JENTHF.html
Also published in Foundations of Organizational Strategy,
Michael C. Jensen, Harvard University Press, 1998.
You may redistribute this document freely, but please do not post the electronic file on the web. I welcome
web links to this document at: http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=94043. I revise my papers regularly, and
providing a link to the original ensures that readers will receive the most recent version. Thank you,
Michael C. Jensen
* Associate Professor and Dean, respectively, Graduate School of Management, University of Rochester.  An
earlier version of this paper was presented at the Conference on Analysis and Ideology, Interlaken,
Switzerland, June 1974, sponsored by the Center for Research in Government Policy and Business at the
University of Rochester, Graduate School of Management.  We are indebted to F. Black, E. Fama, R.
Ibbotson, W. Klein, M. Rozeff, R. Weil, O. Williamson, an anonymous referee, and to our colleagues and
members of the Finance Workshop at the University of Rochester for their comments and criticisms, in
particular G. Benston, M. Canes, D. Henderson, K. Leffler, J. Long, C. Smith, R. Thompson, R. Watts, and J.
Zimmerman.
Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs and Ownership Structure
Michael C. Jensen
Harvard Business School
and
William H. Meckling*
University of Rochester
1.  Introduction
1.1. Motivation of the Paper
In this paper we draw on recent progress in the theory of (1) property rights, (2) agency,
and (3) finance to develop a theory of ownership structure1 for the firm.  In addition to tying
together elements of the theory of each of these three areas, our analysis casts new light on and
has implications for a variety of issues in the professional and popular literature including the
definition of the firm, the “separation of ownership and control,” the “social responsibility” of
business, the definition of a “corporate objective function,” the determination of an optimal capital
structure, the specification of the content of credit agreements, the theory of organizations, and the
supply side of the completeness of markets problems.
1 We do not use the term ‘capital structure’ because that term usually denotes the relative quantities of
bonds, equity, warrants, trade credit, etc., which represent the liabilities of a firm.  Our theory implies there is
another important dimension to this problem—namely the relative amount of ownership claims held by
insiders (management) and outsiders (investors with no direct role in the management of the firm).
Jensen and Meckling
2
1976
Our theory helps explain:
1. why an entrepreneur or manager in a firm which has a mixed financial structure
(containing both debt and outside equity claims) will choose a set of activities for the
firm such that the total value of the firm is less than it would be if he were the sole
owner and why this result is independent of whether the firm operates in monopolistic
or competitive product or factor markets;
2. why his failure to maximize the value of the firm is perfectly consistent with
efficiency;
3. why the sale of common stock is a viable source of capital even though managers do
not literally maximize the value of the firm;
4. why debt was relied upon as a source of capital before debt financing offered any tax
advantage relative to equity;
5. why preferred stock would be issued;
6. why accounting reports would be provided voluntarily to creditors and stockholders,
and why independent auditors would be engaged by management to testify to the
accuracy and correctness of such reports;
7. why lenders often place restrictions on the activities of firms to whom they lend, and
why firms would themselves be led to suggest the imposition of such restrictions;
8. why some industries are characterized by owner-operated firms whose sole outside
source of capital is borrowing;
9. why highly regulated industries such as public utilities or banks will have higher debt
equity ratios for equivalent levels of risk than the average nonregulated firm;
10. why security analysis can be socially productive even if it does not increase portfolio
returns to investors.
Jensen and Meckling
3
1976
1.2 Theory of the Firm:  An Empty Box?
While the literature of economics is replete with references to the “theory of the firm,”
the material generally subsumed under that heading is not actually a theory of the firm but rather a
theory of markets in which firms are important actors.  The firm is a “black box” operated so as
to meet the relevant marginal conditions with respect to inputs and outputs, thereby maximizing
profits, or more accurately, present value.  Except for a few recent and tentative steps, however,
we have no theory which explains how the conflicting objectives of the individual participants are
brought into equilibrium so as to yield this result.  The limitations of this black box view of the firm
have been cited by Adam Smith and Alfred Marshall, among others.  More recently, popular and
professional debates over the “social responsibility” of corporations, the separation of ownership
and control, and the rash of reviews of the literature on the “theory of the firm” have evidenced
continuing concern with these issues.2
A number of major attempts have been made during recent years to construct a theory of
the firm by substituting other models for profit or value maximization, with each attempt motivated
by a conviction that the latter is inadequate to explain managerial behavior in large corporations.3
Some of these reformulation attempts have rejected the fundamental  principle of maximizing
2 Reviews of this literature are given by Peterson (1965), Alchian (1965, 1968), Machlup (1967), Shubik (1970),
Cyert and Hedrick (1972), Branch (1973), Preston (1975).
3 See Williamson (1964, 1970, 1975), Marris (1964), Baumol (1959), Penrose (1958), and Cyert and March
(1963).  Thorough reviews of these and other contributions are given by Machlup (1967) and Alchian (1965).
Simon (1955) developed a model of human choice incorporating information (search) and computational
costs which also has important implications for the behavior of managers.  Unfortunately, Simon’s work has
often been misinterpreted as a denial of maximizing behavior, and misused, especially in the marketing and
behavioral science literature.  His later use of the term “satisficing” (Simon, 1959) has undoubtedly
contributed to this confusion because it suggests rejection of maximizing behavior rather than maximization
subject to costs of information and of decision making.
Jensen and Meckling
4
1976
behavior as well as rejecting the more specific profit-maximizing model.  We retain the notion of
maximizing behavior on the part of all individuals in the analysis that follows.4
1.3 Property Rights
An independent stream of research with important implications for the theory of the firm
has been stimulated by the pioneering work of Coase, and extended by Alchian, Demsetz, and
others.5  A comprehensive survey of this literature is given by Furubotn and Pejovich (1972).
While the focus of this research has been “property rights”,6 the subject matter encompassed is
far broader than that term suggests.  What is important for the problems addressed here is that
specification of individual rights determines how costs and rewards will be allocated among the
participants in any organization.  Since the specification of rights is generally affected through
contracting (implicit as well as explicit), individual behavior in organizations, including the behavior
of managers, will depend upon the nature of these contracts.  We focus in this paper on the
behavioral implications of the property rights specified in the contracts between the owners and
managers of the firm.
1.4 Agency Costs
Many problems associated with the inadequacy of the current theory of the firm can also
be viewed as special cases of the theory of agency relationships in which there is a growing
4 See Meckling (1976) for a discussion of the fundamental importance of the assumption of resourceful,
evaluative, maximizing behavior on the part of individuals in the development of theory.  Klein (1976) takes
an approach similar to the one we embark on in this paper in his review of the theory of the firm and the law.
5 See Coase (1937, 1959, 1960), Alchian (1965, 1968), Alchian and Kessel (1962), Demsetz (1967), Alchian and
Demsetz (1972), Monson and Downs (1965), Silver and Auster (1969), and McManus (1975).
6 Property rights are of course human rights, i.e., rights which are possessed by human beings.  The
introduction of the wholly false distinction between property rights and human rights in many policy
discussions is surely one of the all time great semantic flimflams.
Jensen and Meckling
5
1976
literature.7  This literature has developed independently of the property rights literature even
though the problems with which it is concerned are similar; the approaches are in fact highly
complementary to each other.
We define an agency relationship as a contract under which one or more persons (the
principal(s)) engage another person (the agent) to perform some service on their behalf which
involves delegating some decision making authority to the agent.  If both parties to the relationship
are utility maximizers, there is good reason to believe that the agent will not always act in the best
interests of the principal.  The principal can limit divergences from his interest by establishing
appropriate incentives for the agent and by incurring monitoring costs designed to limit the
aberrant activities of the agent.  In addition in some situations it will pay the agent to expend
resources (bonding costs) to guarantee that he will not take certain actions which would harm the
principal or to ensure that the principal will be compensated if he does take such actions.
However, it is generally impossible for the principal or the agent at zero cost to ensure that the
agent will make optimal decisions from the principal’s viewpoint.  In most agency relationships the
principal and the agent will incur positive monitoring and bonding costs (non-pecuniary as well as
pecuniary), and in addition there will be some divergence between the agent’s decisions8 and
those decisions which would maximize the welfare of the principal.  The dollar equivalent of the
reduction in welfare experienced by the principal as a result of this divergence is also a cost of the
agency relationship, and we refer to this latter cost as the “residual loss.”  We define agency
costs as the sum of:
7  Cf. Berhold (1971), Ross (1973, 1974a), Wilson (1968, 1969), and Heckerman (1975).
8  Given the optimal monitoring and bonding activities by the principal and agent.
Jensen and Meckling
6
1976
1. the monitoring expenditures by the principal,9
2. the bonding expenditures by the agent,
3. the residual loss.
Note also that agency costs arise in any situation involving cooperative effort (such as the co-
authoring of this paper) by two or more people even though there is no clear-cut principal-agent
relationship.  Viewed in this light it is clear that our definition of agency costs and their importance
to the theory of the firm bears a close relationship to the problem of shirking and monitoring of
team production which Alchian and Demsetz (1972) raise in their paper on the theory of the firm.
Since the relationship between the stockholders and the managers of a corporation fits the
definition of a pure agency relationship, it should come as no surprise to discover that the issues
associated with the “separation of ownership and control” in the modern diffuse ownership
corporation are intimately associated with the general problem of agency.  We show below that an
explanation of why and how the agency costs generated by the corporate form are born leads to a
theory of the ownership (or capital) structure of the firm.
Before moving on, however, it is worthwhile to point out the generality of the agency
problem.  The problem of inducing an “agent” to behave as if he were maximizing the
“principal’s” welfare is quite general.  It exists in all organizations and in all cooperative efforts—
at every level of management in firms,10 in universities, in mutual companies, in cooperatives, in
9 As it is used in this paper the term monitoring includes more than just measuring or observing the behavior
of the agent.  It includes efforts on the part of the principal to ‘control’ the behavior of the agent through
budget restrictions, compensation policies, operating rules, etc.
10 As we show below the existence of positive monitoring and bonding costs will result in the manager of a
corporation possessing control over some resources which he can allocate (within certain constraints) to
satisfy his own preferences.  However, to the extent that he must obtain the cooperation of others in order
to carry out his tasks (such as divisional vice presidents) and to the extent that he cannot control their
behavior perfectly and costlessly they will be able to appropriate some of these resources for their own
ends.  In short, there are agency costs generated at every level of the organization.  Unfortunately, the
analysis of these more general organizational issues is even more difficult than that of the ‘ownership and
Jensen and Meckling
7
1976
governmental authorities and bureaus, in unions, and in relationships normally classified as agency
relationships such as those common in the performing arts and the market for real estate.  The
development of theories to explain the form which agency costs take in each of these situations
(where the contractual relations differ significantly), and how and why they are born will lead to a
rich theory of organizations which is now lacking in economics and the social sciences generally.
We confine our attention in this paper to only a small part of this general problem—the analysis of
agency costs generated by the contractual arrangements between the owners and top
management of the corporation.
Our approach to the agency problem here differs fundamentally from most of the existing
literature.  That literature focuses almost exclusively on the normative aspects of the agency
relationship; that is, how to structure the contractual relation (including compensation incentives)
between the principal and agent to provide appropriate incentives for the agent to make choices
which will maximize the principal’s welfare, given that uncertainty and imperfect monitoring exist.
We focus almost entirely on the positive aspects of the theory.  That is, we assume individuals
solve these normative problems, and given that only stocks and bonds can be issued as claims, we
investigate the incentives faced by each of the parties and the elements entering into the
determination of the equilibrium contractual form characterizing the relationship between the
manager (i.e., agent) of the firm and the outside equity and debt holders (i.e., principals).
1.5 General Comments on the Definition of the firm
Ronald Coase in his seminal paper entitled “The Nature of the Firm” (1937) pointed out
that economics had no positive theory to determine the bounds of the firm.  He characterized the
control’ issue because the nature of the contractual obligations and rights of the parties are much more
varied and generally not as well specified in explicit contractual arrangements.  Nevertheless, they exist and
we believe that extensions of our analysis in these directions show promise of producing insights into a
viable theory of organization.
Jensen and Meckling
8
1976
bounds of the firm as that range of exchanges over which the market system was suppressed and
where resource allocation was accomplished instead by authority and direction.  He focused on
the cost of using markets to effect contracts and exchanges and argued that activities would be
included within the firm whenever the costs of using markets were greater than the costs of using
direct authority.  Alchian and Demsetz (1972) object to the notion that activities within the firm are
governed by authority, and correctly emphasize the role of contracts as a vehicle for voluntary
exchange.  They emphasize the role of monitoring in situations in which there is joint input or team
production.11  We are sympathetic to with the importance they attach to monitoring, but we believe
the emphasis that Alchian and Demsetz place on joint input production is too narrow and therefore
misleading.  Contractual relations are the essence of the firm, not only with employees but with
suppliers, customers, creditors, and so on.  The problem of agency costs and monitoring exists for
all of these contracts, independent of whether there is joint production in their sense; i.e., joint
production can explain only a small fraction of the behavior of individuals associated with a firm.
It is important to recognize that most organizations are simply legal fictions12 which serve
as a nexus for a set of contracting relationships among individuals.  This includes firms, non-profit
institutions such as universities, hospitals, and foundations, mutual organizations such as mutual
savings banks and insurance companies and co-operatives, some private clubs, and even
governmental bodies such as cities, states, and the federal government, government enterprises
such as TVA, the Post Office, transit systems, and so forth.
11 They define the classical capitalist firm as a contractual organization of inputs in which there is ‘(a) joint
input production, (b) several input owners, (c) one party who is common to all the contracts of the joint
inputs, (d) who has rights to renegotiate any input’s contract independently of contracts with other input
owners, (e) who holds the residual claim, and (f) who has the right to sell his contractual residual status.’
12 By legal fiction we mean the artificial construct under the law which allows certain organizations to be
treated as individuals.
Jensen and Meckling
9
1976
The private corporation or firm is simply one form of legal fiction which serves as a nexus
for contracting relationships and which is also characterized by the existence of divisible residual
claims on the assets and cash flows of the organization which can generally be sold without
permission of the other contracting individuals.  Although  this definition of the firm has little
substantive content, emphasizing the essential contractual nature of firms and other organizations
focuses attention on a crucial set of questions—why particular sets of contractual relations arise
for various types of organizations, what the consequences of these contractual relations are, and
how they are affected by changes exogenous to the organization.  Viewed this way, it makes little
or no sense to try to distinguish those things that are “inside” the firm (or any other organization)
from those things that are “outside” of it.  There is in a very real sense only a multitude of
complex relationships (i.e., contracts) between the legal fiction (the firm) and the owners of labor,
material and capital inputs and the consumers of output.13
Viewing the firm as the nexus of a set of contracting relationships among individuals also
serves to make it clear that the personalization of the firm implied by asking questions such as
“what should be the objective function of the firm?” or “does the firm have a social
responsibility?” is seriously misleading.  The firm is not an individual.  It is a legal fiction which
serves as a focus for a complex process in which the conflicting objectives of individuals (some of
whom may “represent” other organizations) are brought into equilibrium within a framework of
contractual relations.  In this sense the “behavior” of the firm is like the behavior of a market, that
is, the outcome of a complex equilibrium process.  We seldom fall into the trap of characterizing
13 For example, we ordinarily think of a product as leaving the firm at the time it is sold, but implicitly or
explicitly such sales generally carry with them continuing contracts between the firm and the buyer.  If the
product does not perform as expected the buyer often can and does have a right to satisfaction.  Explicit
evidence that such implicit contracts do exist is the practice we occasionally observe of specific provision
that ‘all sales are final.’
Jensen and Meckling
10
1976
the wheat or stock market as an individual, but we often make this error by thinking about
organizations as if they were persons with motivations and intentions.14
1.6  Overview of the Paper
We develop our theory in stages.  Sections 2 and 4 provide analyses of the agency costs
of equity and debt respectively.  These form the major foundation of the theory.  In Section 3, we
pose some questions regarding the existence of the corporate form of organization and examines
the role of limited liability.  Section 5 provides a synthesis of the basic concepts derived in sections
2-4 into a theory of the corporate ownership structure which takes account of the trade-offs
available to the entrepreneur-manager between inside and outside equity and debt.  Some
qualifications and extensions of the analysis are discussed in section 6, and section 7 contains a
brief summary and conclusions.
2.  The Agency Costs of Outside Equity
2.1 Overview
In this section we analyze the effect of outside equity on agency costs by comparing the
behavior of a manager when he owns 100 percent of the residual claims on a firm with his
behavior when he sells off a portion of those claims to outsiders.  If a wholly-owned firm is
managed by the owner, he will make operating decisions that maximize his utility.  These decisions
14 This view of the firm points up the important role which the legal system and the law play in social
organizations, especially, the organization of economic activity.  Statutory laws sets bounds on the kinds of
contracts into which individuals and organizations may enter without risking criminal prosecution.  The
police powers of the state are available and used to enforce performance of contracts or to enforce the
collection of damages for non-performance. The courts adjudicate conflicts between contracting parties and
establish precedents which form the body of common law.  All of these government activities affect both the
kinds of contracts executed and the extent to which contracting is relied upon.  This in turn determines the
usefulness, productivity, profitability and viability of various forms of organization.  Moreover, new laws as
well as court decisions often can and do change the rights of contracting parties ex post, and they can and
do serve as a vehicle for redistribution of wealth.  An analysis of some of the implications of these facts is
contained in Jensen and Meckling (1978) and we shall not pursue them here.
Jensen and Meckling
11
1976
will involve not only the benefits he derives from pecuniary returns but also the utility generated by
various non-pecuniary aspects of his entrepreneurial activities such as the physical appointments
of the office, the attractiveness of the office staff, the level of employee discipline, the kind and
amount of charitable contributions, personal relations (“friendship,” “respect,” and so on) with
employees, a larger than optimal computer to play with, or purchase of production inputs from
friends.  The optimum mix (in the absence of taxes) of the various pecuniary and non-pecuniary
benefits is achieved when the marginal utility derived from an additional dollar of expenditure
(measured net of any productive effects) is equal for each non-pecuniary item and equal to the
marginal utility derived from an additional dollar of after-tax purchasing power (wealth).
If the owner-manager sells equity claims on the corporation which are identical to his own
(i.e., which share proportionately in the profits of the firm and have limited liability), agency costs
will be generated by the divergence between his interest and those of the outside shareholders,
since he will then bear only a fraction of the costs of any non-pecuniary benefits he takes out in
maximizing his own utility.  If the manager owns only 95 percent of the stock, he will expend
resources to the point where the marginal utility derived from a dollar’s expenditure of the firm’s
resources on such items equals the marginal utility of an additional 95 cents in general purchasing
power (i.e., his share of the wealth reduction) and not one dollar.  Such activities, on his part, can
be limited (but probably not eliminated) by the expenditure of resources on monitoring activities by
the outside stockholders.  But as we show below, the owner will bear the entire wealth effects of
these expected costs so long as the equity market anticipates these effects.  Prospective minority
shareholders will realize that the owner-manager’s interests will diverge somewhat from theirs;
hence the price which they will pay for shares will reflect the monitoring costs and the effect of
the divergence between the manager’s interest and theirs.  Nevertheless, ignoring for the moment
the possibility of borrowing against his wealth, the owner will find it desirable to bear these costs
Jensen and Meckling
12
1976
as long as the welfare increment he experiences from converting his claims on the firm into
general purchasing power15 is large enough to offset them.
As the owner-manager’s fraction of the equity falls, his fractional claim on the outcomes
falls and this will tend to encourage him to appropriate larger amounts of the corporate resources
in the form of perquisites. This also makes it desirable for the minority shareholders to expend
more resources in monitoring his behavior.  Thus, the wealth costs to the owner of obtaining
additional cash in the equity markets rise as his fractional ownership falls.
We shall continue to characterize the agency conflict between the owner-manager and
outside shareholders as deriving from the manager’s tendency to appropriate perquisites out of the
firm’s resources for his own consumption.  However, we do not mean to leave the impression that
this is the only or even the most important source of conflict.  Indeed, it is likely that the most
important conflict arises from the fact that as the manager’s ownership claim falls, his incentive to
devote significant effort to creative activities such as searching out new profitable ventures falls.
He may in fact avoid such ventures simply because it requires too much trouble or effort on his
part to manage or to learn about new technologies.  Avoidance of these personal costs and the
anxieties that go with them also represent a source of on-the-job utility to him and it can result in
the value of the firm being substantially lower than it otherwise could be.
2.2 A Simple Formal Analysis of the Sources of Agency Costs of Equity and Who Bears Them
In order to develop some structure for the analysis to follow we make two sets of
assumptions.  The first set (permanent assumptions) are those which will carry through almost all
of the analysis in sections 2-5.  The effects of relaxing some of these are discussed in section 6.
15 For use in consumption, for the diversification of his wealth, or more importantly, for the financing of
‘profitable’ projects which he could not otherwise finance out of his personal wealth.  We deal with these
issues below after having developed some of the elementary analytical tools necessary to their solution.
Jensen and Meckling
13
1976
The second set (temporary assumptions) are made only for expositional purposes and are relaxed
as soon as the basic points have been clarified.
Permanent assumptions
(P.1)
All taxes are zero.
(P.2)
No trade credit is available.
(P.3)
All outside equity shares are non-voting.
(P.4)
No complex financial claims such as convertible bonds or preferred stock or
warrants can be issued.
(P.5)
No outside owner gains utility from ownership in a firm in any way other than
through its effect on his wealth or cash flows.
(P.6)
All dynamic aspects of the multiperiod nature of the problem are ignored by
assuming there is only one production-financing decision to be made by the
entrepreneur.
(P.7)
The entrepreneur-manager’s money wages are held constant throughout the
analysis.
(P.8)
There exists a single manager (the peak coordinator) with ownership interest in
the firm.
Temporary assumptions
(T.1)
The size of the firm is fixed.
(T.2)
No monitoring or bonding activities are possible.
(T.3)
No debt financing through bonds, preferred stock, or personal borrowing (secured
or unsecured) is possible.
Jensen and Meckling
14
1976
(T.4)
All elements of the owner-manager’s decision problem involving portfolio
considerations induced by the presence of uncertainty and the existence of
diversifiable risk are ignored.
Define:
X
=
{x1, x2, . . .,xn} = vector of quantities of all factors and activities within the
firm from which the manager derives non-pecuniary benefits;16 the xi are defined
such that his marginal utility is positive for each of them;
C(X)
=
total dollar cost of providing any given amount of these items;
P(X)
=
total dollar value to the firm of the productive benefits of X;
B(X)
=
P(X)-C(X) = net dollar benefit to the firm of X ignoring any effects of X on
the equilibrium wage of the manager.
Ignoring the effects of X on the manager’s utility and therefore on his equilibrium wage
rate, the optimum levels of the factors and activities X are defined by X* such
that
∂B(X*)
∂X *
 =  ∂P(X*)
∂X *
 − ∂C(X*)
∂X *
 =  0.
Thus for any vector X ≥ X* (i.e., where at least one element of X is greater than its
corresponding element of X*), F ≡ B(X*) - B(X) > 0 measures the dollar cost to the firm (net of
any productive effects) of providing the increment X - X* of the factors and activities which
generate utility to the manager.  We assume henceforth that for any given level of cost to the firm,
F, the vector of factors and activities on which F is spent on those, ˆ X , which yield the manager
maximum utility.  Thus F ≡ B(X*) - B( ˆ X ).
16  Such as office space, air conditioning, thickness of the carpets, friendliness of employee relations, etc.
Jensen and Meckling
15
1976
We have thus far ignored in our discussion the fact that these expenditures on X occur
through time and therefore there are trade-offs to be made across time as well as between
alternative elements of X.  Furthermore, we have ignored the fact that the future expenditures are
likely to involve uncertainty (i.e., they are subject to probability distributions) and therefore some
allowance must be made for their riskiness.  We resolve both of these issues by defining C, P, B,
and F to be the current market values of the sequence of probability distributions on the period-
by-period cash flows involved.17
Given the definition of F as the current market value of the stream of manager’s
expenditures on non-pecuniary benefits, we represent the constraint which a single owner-
manager faces in deciding how much non-pecuniary income he will extract from the firm by the
line V F in fig. 1.  This is analogous to a budget constraint.  The market value of the firm is
measured along the vertical axis and the market value of the manager’s stream of expenditures on
non-pecuniary benefits, F, is measured along the horizontal axis.  OV  is the value of the firm
when the amount of non-pecuniary income consumed is zero.  By definition V  is the maximum
market value of the cash flows generated by the firm for a given money wage for the manager
when the manager’s consumption of non-pecuniary benefits are zero.  At this point all the factors
and activities within the firm which generate utility for the manager are at the level X* defined
above.  There is a different budget constraint V F for each possible scale of the firm (i.e., level of
investment, I) and for alternative levels of money wage, W, for the manager.  For the moment we
pick an arbitrary level of investment (which we assume has already been made) and hold the
scale of the firm constant at this level.  We also assume that the manager’s money wage is fixed
17 And again we assume that for any given market value of these costs, F, to the firm the allocation across
time and across alternative probability distributions is such that the manager’s current expected utility is at a
maximum.
Jensen and Meckling
16
1976
at the level W* which represents the current market value of his wage contract18 in the optimal
compensation package which consists of both wages, W*, and non-pecuniary benefits, F*.  Since
one dollar of current value of non-pecuniary benefits withdrawn from the firm by the manager
reduces the market value of the firm by $1, by definition, the slope of V F is -1.
The owner-manager’s tastes for wealth and non-pecuniary benefits is represented in fig.
1 by a system of indifference curves, U1, U2, and so on.19  The indifference curves will be convex
as drawn as long as the owner-manager’s marginal rate of substitution between non-pecuniary
benefits and wealth diminishes with increasing levels of the benefits. For the 100 percent owner-
manager, this presumes that there are not perfect substitutes for these benefits available on the
outside, that is, to some extent they are job-specific.  For the fractional owner-manager this
presumes that the benefits cannot be turned into general purchasing power at a constant price.20
When the owner has 100 percent of the equity, the value of the firm will be V* where
indifference curve U2 is tangent to VF, and the level of non-pecuniary benefits consumed is F*.
If the owner sells the entire equity but remains as manager, and if the equity buyer can, at zero
18 At this stage when we are considering a 100% owner-managed firm the notion of a ‘wage contract’ with
himself has no content.  However, the 100% owner-managed case is only an expositional device used in
passing to illustrate a number of points in the analysis, and we ask the reader to bear with us briefly while
we lay out the structure for the more interesting partial ownership case where such a contract does have
substance.
19 The manager’s utility function is actually defined over wealth and the future time sequence of vectors of
quantities of non-pecuniary benefits, Xt.  Although the setting of his problem is somewhat different, Fama
(1970b, 1972) analyzes the conditions under which these preferences can be represented as a derived utility
function defined as a function of the money value of the expenditures (in our notation F) on these goods
conditional on the prices of goods.  Such a utility function incorporates the optimization going on in the
background which define ˆ
X  discussed above for a given F.  In the more general case where we allow a time
series of consumption, ˆ
X t, the optimization is being carried out across both time and the components of Xt
for fixed F.
20 This excludes, for instance, (a) the case where the manager is allowed to expend corporate resources on
anything he pleases in which case F would be a perfect substitute for wealth, or (b) the case where he can
‘steal’ cash (or other marketable assets) with constant returns to scale—if he could the indifference curves
would be straight lines with slope determined by the fence commission.
Jensen and Meckling
17
1976
cost, force the old owner (as manager) to take the same level of non-pecuniary benefits as he did
as owner, then V* is the price the new owner will be willing to pay for the entire equity.21
Fig. 1.
The value of the firm (V) and the level of non-pecuniary benefits consumed (F) when the fraction
of outside equity is (1-α)V, and Uj(j = 1,2,3) represents owner’s indifference curves between wealth and
non-pecuniary benefits.
21 Point D defines the fringe benefits in the optimal pay package since the value to the manager of the fringe
benefits F* is greater than the cost of providing them as is evidenced by the fact that U2 is steeper to the
left of D than the budget constraint with slope equal to -1.
That D is indeed the optimal pay package can easily be seen in this situation since if the conditions of the
sale to a new owner specified that the manager would receive no fringe benefits after the sale he would
require a payment equal to V3 to compensate him for the sacrifice of his claims to V* and fringe benefits
amounting to F* (the latter with total value to him of V3-V*).  But if F = 0, the value of the firm is only V .
Therefore, if monitoring costs were zero the sale would take place at V* with provision for a pay package
which included fringe benefits of F* for the manager.
This discussion seems to indicate there are two values for the ‘firm’, V3 and V*.  This is not the case if we
realize that V* is the value of the right to be the residual claimant on the cash flows of the firm and V3-V* is
the value of the managerial rights, i.e., the right to make the operating decisions which include access to F*.
There is at least one other right which has value which plays no formal role in the analysis as yet—the value
of the control right.  By control right we mean the right to hire and fire the manager and we leave this issue
to a future paper.
Jensen and Meckling
18
1976
In general, however, we could not expect the new owner to be able to enforce identical
behavior on the old owner at zero costs.  If the old owner sells a fraction of the firm to an
outsider, he, as manager, will no longer bear the full cost of any non-pecuniary benefits he
consumes.  Suppose the owner sells a share of the firm, 1-α, (0 < α < 1) and retains for himself a
share, α.  If the prospective buyer believes that the owner-manager will consume the same level
of non-pecuniary benefits as he did as full owner, the buyer will be willing to pay (1-α)V* for a
fraction (1-α) of the equity.  Given that an outsider now holds a claim to (1-α) of the equity,
however, the cost to the owner-manager of consuming $1 of non-pecuniary benefits in the firm
will no longer be $1.  Instead, it will be α x $1.  If the prospective buyer actually paid (1-α)V* for
his share of the equity, and if thereafter the manager could choose whatever level of non-
pecuniary benefits he liked, his budget constraint would be V1P1 in fig. 1 and has a slope equal to -
α,  Including the payment the owner receives from the buyer as part of the owner’s post-sale
wealth, his budget constraint, V1P1, must pass through D, since he can if he wishes have the same
wealth and level of non-pecuniary consumption he enjoyed as full owner.
But if the owner-manager is free to choose the level of perquisites, F, subject only to the
loss in wealth he incurs as a part owner, his welfare will be maximized by increasing his
consumption of non-pecuniary benefits.  He will move to point A where V1P1 is tangent to U1
representing a higher level of utility.  The value of the firm falls from V*, to V0, that is, by the
amount of the cost to the firm of the increased non-pecuniary expenditures, and the owner-
manager’s consumption of non-pecuniary benefits rises from F* to F0.
If the equity market is characterized by rational expectations the buyers will be aware that
the owner will increase his non-pecuniary consumption when his ownership share is reduced.  If
the owner’s response function is known or if the equity market makes unbiased estimates of the
Jensen and Meckling
19
1976
owner’s response to the changed incentives, the buyer will not pay (1-α)V* for (1-α) of the
equity.
Theorem.  For a claim on the firm of (1-α) the outsider will pay only (1-α) times the
value he expects the firm to have given the induced change in the behavior of the owner-manager.
Proof.  For simplicity we ignore any element of uncertainty introduced by the lack of
perfect knowledge of the owner-manager’s response function.  Such uncertainty will not affect
the final solution if the equity market is large as long as the estimates are rational (i.e., unbiased)
and the errors are independent across firms.  The latter condition assures that this risk is
diversifiable and therefore that equilibrium prices will equal the expected values.
Let W represent the owner’s total wealth after he has sold a claim equal to 1-α of the
equity to an outsider.  W has two components.  One is the payment, So, made by the outsider for
1-α of the equity; the rest, Si, is the value of the owner’s (i.e., insider’s) share of the firm, so that
W, the owner’s wealth, is given by
W  = So + Si = So + αV(F, α),
where V(F, α) represents the value of the firm given that the manager’s fractional
ownership share is α and that he consumes perquisites with current market value of F.  Let V2P2,
with a slope of -α represent the trade-off the owner-manager faces between non-pecuniary
benefits and his wealth after the sale.  Given that the owner has decided to sell a claim 1-α of the
firm, his welfare will be maximized when V2P2 is tangent to some indifference curve such as U3 in
fig. 1.  A price for a claim of (1-α) on the firm that is satisfactory to both the buyer and the seller
will require that this tangency occur along V F, that is, that the value of the firm must be V’.  To
show this, assume that such is not the case—that the tangency occurs to the left of the point B on
the line V F.  Then, since the slope of V2P2 is negative, the value of the firm will be larger than V’.
Jensen and Meckling
20
1976
The owner-manager’s choice of this lower level of consumption of non-pecuniary benefits will
imply a higher value both to the firm as a whole and to the fraction of the firm (1-α) which the
outsider has acquired; that is, (1-α)V’ > So.  From the owner’s viewpoint, he has sold 1-α of the
firm for less than he could have, given the (assumed) lower level of non-pecuniary benefits he
enjoys.  On the other hand, if the tangency point B is to the right of the line V F, the owner-
manager’s higher consumption of non-pecuniary benefits means the value of the firm is less than
V’, and hence (1-α)V(F, α) < So = (1-α)V’.  The outside owner then has paid more for his share
of the equity than it is worth.  So will be a mutually satisfactory price if and only if (1-α)V’ = So.
But this means that the owner’s post-sale wealth is equal to the (reduced) value of the firm V’,
since
W = So + αV’ = (1-α)V’ + aV’ = V’.
Q.E.D.
The requirement that V’ and F’ fall on V F is thus equivalent to requiring that the value of
the claim acquired by the outside buyer be equal to the amount he pays for it, and conversely for
the owner.  This means that the decline in the total value of the firm (V*-V’) is entirely
imposed on the owner-manager.  His total wealth after the sale of (1-α) of the equity is V’ and
the decline in his wealth is V*-V’.
The distance V*-V’ is the reduction in the market value of the firm engendered by the
agency relationship and is a measure of the “residual loss” defined earlier.  In this simple example
the residual loss represents the total agency costs engendered by the sale of outside equity
because monitoring and bonding activities have not been allowed.  The welfare loss the owner
incurs is less than the residual loss by the value to him of the increase in non-pecuniary benefits
(F’-F*).  In fig. 1 the difference between the intercepts on the Y axis of the two indifference
Jensen and Meckling
21
1976
curves U2 and U3 is a measure of the owner-manager’s welfare loss due to the incurrence of
agency costs,22 and he would sell such a claim only if the increment in welfare he achieved by
using the cash amounting to (1-α)V’ for other things was worth more to him than this amount of
wealth.
2.3 Determination of the Optimal Scale of the Firm
The case of all equity financing.  Consider the problem faced by an entrepreneur with
initial pecuniary wealth, W, and monopoly access to a project requiring investment outlay, I, subject
to diminishing returns to scale in I.  Fig. 2 portrays the solution to the optimal scale of the firm
taking into account the agency costs associated with the existence of outside equity.  The axes are
as defined in fig. 1 except we now plot on the vertical axis the total wealth of the owner, that is,
his initial wealth, W, plus V(I)-I, the net increment in wealth he obtains from exploitation of his
investment opportunities.  The market value of the firm, V = V(I,F), is now a function of the level
of investment, I, and the current market value of the manager’s expenditures of the firm’s
resources on non-pecuniary benefits, F.  Let V (I)  represent the value of the firm as a function of
the level of investment when the manager’s expenditures on non-pecuniary benefits, F, are zero.
The schedule with intercept labeled W  + [V (I*)−I*)] and slope equal to -1 in fig. 2 represents the
locus of combinations of post-investment wealth and dollar cost to thefirm of non-pecuniary
benefits which are available to the manager when investment is carried to the value maximizing
point, I*.  At this point ∆V (I) −∆I  =  0 .  If the manager’s wealth were large enough to cover the
investment required to reach this scale of operation, I*, he would consume F* in non-pecuniary
22 The distance V*-V’ is a measure of what we will define as the gross agency costs.  The distance V3-V4 is a
measure of what we call net agency costs, and it is this measure of agency costs which will be minimized by
the manager in the general case where we allow investment to change.
Jensen and Meckling
22
1976
benefits and have pecuniary wealth with value W + V*-I*.  However, if outside financing is
required to cover the investment he will not reach this point if monitoring costs are non-zero.23
The expansion path OZBC represents the equilibrium combinations of wealth and non-
pecuniary benefits, F, which the manager could obtain if he had enough personal wealth to finance
all levels of investment up to I*.  It is the locus of points such as Z and C which present the
equilibrium position for the 100 percent owner-manager at each possible level of investment, I.  As
I increases we move up the expansion path to the point C where V(I)-I is at a maximum.
Additional investment beyond this point reduces the net value of the firm, and as it does the
equilibrium path of the manager’s wealth and non-pecuniary benefits retraces (in the reverse
direction) the curve OZBC.  We draw the path as a smooth concave function only as a matter of
convenience.
Fig. 2.
Determination of the optimal scale of the firm in the case where no monitoring takes place.  Point C
denotes optimum investment, I*, and non-pecuniary benefits, F*, when investment is 100% financed by
entrepreneur.  Point D denotes optimum investment, I’, and non-pecuniary benefits, F, when outside equity
financing is used to help finance the investment and the entrepreneur owns a fraction α‘ of the firm.  The
distance A measures the gross agency costs.
23 I* is the value maximizing and Pareto Optimum investment level which results from the traditional analysis
of the corporate investment decision if the firm operates in perfectly competitive capital and product markets
and the agency cost problems discussed here are ignored.  See Debreu (1959, ch. 7), Jensen and Long
(1972), Long (1972), Merton and Subrahmanyam (1974), Hirshleifer (1958, 1970), and Fama and Miller (1972).
Jensen and Meckling
23
1976
If the manager obtained outside financing and if there were zero costs to the agency
relationship (perhaps because monitoring costs were zero), the expansion path would also be
represented by OZBC.  Therefore, this path represents what we might call the “idealized”
solutions, that is, those which would occur in the absence of agency costs.
Assume the manager has sufficient personal wealth to completely finance the firm only up
to investment level I1, which puts him at point Z.  At this point W = I1.  To increase the size of the
firm beyond this point he must obtain outside financing to cover the additional investment required,
and this means reducing his fractional ownership. When he does this he incurs agency costs, and
the lower his ownership fraction, the larger are the agency costs he incurs.  However, if the
investments requiring outside financing are sufficiently profitable his welfare will continue to
increase.
The expansion path ZEDHL in fig. 2 portrays one possible path of the equilibrium levels of
the owner’s non-pecuniary benefits and wealth at each possible level of investment higher than I1.
This path is the locus of points such as E or D where (1) the manager’s indifference curve is
tangent to a line with slope equal to -α (his fractional claim on the firm at that level of investment),
and (2) the tangency occurs on the “budget constraint” with slope = -1 for the firm value and non-
pecuniary benefit trade-off at the same level of investment.24  As we move along ZEDHL his
24 Each equilibrium point such as that at E is characterized by ( ˆ
α , ˆ
F ,
c
Wτ ) where
c
Wτ  is the entrepreneur’s
post-investment financing wealth.  Such an equilibrium must satisfy each of the following four conditions:
(1)
c
Wτ + F  =  V (I) + W −I  =  V (I) −K,
where K ≡ I-W is the amount of outside financing required to make the investment I.  If this condition is not
satisfied there is an uncompensated wealth transfer (in one direction or the other) between the entrepreneur
and outside equity buyers.
(2)
F
U
(
c
Wτ , ˆ
F )/
Wτ
U
(
c
Wτ , ˆ
F )  =  ˆ
α ,
where U is the entrepreneur’s utility function on wealth and perquisites,
F
U
 and
Wτ
U
 are marginal utilities
and ˆ
α  is the manager’s share of the firm.
Jensen and Meckling
24
1976
fractional claim on the firm continues to fall as he raises larger amounts of outside capital.  This
expansion path represents his complete opportunity set for combinations of wealth and non-
pecuniary benefits, given the existence of the costs of the agency relationship with the outside
equity holders.  Point D, where this opportunity set is tangent to an indifference curve, represents
the solution which maximizes his welfare.  At this point, the level of investments is I’, his fractional
ownership share in the firm is α‘, his wealth is W+V’-I’, and he consumes a stream of non-
pecuniary benefits with current market value of F’.  The gross agency costs (denoted by A) are
equal to (V*-I*)-(V’-I’).  Given that no monitoring is possible, I’ is the socially optimal level of
investment as well as the privately optimal level.
We can characterize the optimal level of investment as that point, I’ which satisfies the
following condition for small changes:
V - I + α‘F = 0
(1)
V-I is the change in the net market value of the firm, and α‘F is the dollar value to
the manager of the incremental fringe benefits he consumes (which cost the firm F dollars).25
Furthermore, recognizing that V  =  V −F,  where  V  is the value of the firm at any level of
investment when F = 0, we can substitute into the optimum condition to get
(3)
(1 −ˆ
α )V(I)  =  (1 −ˆ
α )[V (I) −ˆ
F ] ≥ K,
which says the funds received from outsiders are at least equal to K, the minimum required outside
financing.
(4) Among all points ( ˆ
α , ˆ
F ,
c
Wτ ) satisfying conditions (1)-(3), (α, F,
τ
W )  gives the manager highest utility.
This implies that ( ˆ
α , ˆ
F ,
c
Wτ ) satisfy condition (3) as an equality.
25 Proof.  Note that the slope of the expansion path (or locus of equilibrium points) at any point is (V-
I)/F and at the optimum level of investment this must be equal to the slope of the manager’s indifference
curve between wealth and market value of fringe benefits, F.  Furthermore, in the absence of monitoring, the
slope of the indifference curve, WF, at the equilibrium point, D, must be equal to -α‘.  Thus,
(V-I)/F = -α‘
(2)
Jensen and Meckling
25
1976
(∆V −∆I) − 1−α' )∆F  =  0 (3)
as an alternative expression for determining the optimum level of investment.
The idealized or zero agency cost solution, I*, is given by the condition (∆V −∆I) =  0 ,
and since F is positive the actual welfare maximizing level of investment I’ will be less than I*,
because (∆V −∆I)   must be positive at I’ if (3) is to be satisfied.  Since -α‘ is the slope of the
indifference curve at the optimum and therefore represents the manager’s demand price for
incremental non-pecuniary benefits, F, we know that α‘F is the dollar value to him of an
increment of fringe benefits costing the firm F dollars.  The term (1-α‘)F thus measures the
dollar “loss” to the firm (and himself) of an additional F dollars spent on non-pecuniary benefits.
The term ∆V −∆I  is the gross increment in the value of the firm ignoring any changes in the
consumption of non-pecuniary benefits.  Thus, the manager stops increasing the size of the firm
when the gross increment in value is just offset by the incremental “loss” involved in the
consumption of additional fringe benefits due to his declining fractional interest in the firm.26
is the condition for the optimal scale of investment and this implies condition (1) holds for small changes at
the optimum level of investment, I’.
26 Since the manager’s indifference curves are negatively sloped we know that the optimum scale of the firm,
point D, will occur in the region where the expansion path has negative slope, i.e., the market value of the
firm, will be declining and the gross agency costs, A, will be increasing and thus, the manager will not
minimize them in making the investment decision (even though he will minimize them for any given level of
investment).  However, we define the net agency cost as the dollar equivalent of the welfare loss the
manager experiences because of the agency relationship evaluated at F = 0 (the vertical distance between
the intercepts on the Y axis of the two indifference curves on which points C and D lie).  The optimum
solution, I’, does satisfy the condition that net agency costs are minimized.  But this simply amounts to a
restatement of the assumption that the manager maximizes his welfare.
Finally, it is possible for the solution point D to be a corner solution and in this case the value of the firm
will not be declining.  Such a corner solution can occur, for instance, if the manager’s marginal rate of
substitution between F and wealth falls to zero fast enough as we move up the expansion path, or if the
investment projects are “sufficiently” profitable.  In these cases the expansion path will have a corner which
lies on the maximum value budget constraint with intercept V (I*) −I * , and the level of investment will be
equal to the idealized optimum, I*.  However, the market value of the residual claims will be less than V*
because the manager’s consumption of perquisites will be larger than F*, the zero agency cost level.
Jensen and Meckling
26
1976
2.4 The Role of Monitoring and Bonding Activities in Reducing Agency Costs
In the above analysis we have ignored the potential for controlling the behavior of the
owner-manager through monitoring and other control activities.  In practice, it is usually possible
by expending resources to alter the opportunity the owner-manager has for capturing non-
pecuniary benefits. These methods include auditing, formal control systems, budget restrictions,
the establishment of incentive compensation systems which serve to identify the manager’s
interests more closely with those of the outside equity holders, and so forth.  Fig. 3 portrays the
effects of monitoring and other control activities in the simple situation portrayed in fig. 1.  Figs. 1
and 3 are identical except for the curve BCE in fig. 3 which depicts a “budget constraint” derived
when monitoring possibilities are taken into account.  Without monitoring, and with outside equity
of (1-α), the value of the firm will be V’ and non-pecuniary expenditures F’.  By incurring
monitoring costs, M, the equity holders can restrict the manager’s consumption of perquisites to
amounts less than F’.  Let F(M, α) denote the maximum perquisites the manager can consume
for alternative levels of monitoring expenditures, M, given his ownership share α.  We assume
that increases in monitoring reduce F, and reduce it at a decreasing rate, that is, ∂F/∂M < 0 and
∂2F/∂M2 > 0.
Since the current value of expected future monitoring expenditures by the outside equity
holders reduce the value of any given claim on the firm to them dollar for dollar, the outside equity
holders will take this into account in determining the maximum price they will pay for any given
fraction of the firm’s equity.  Therefore, given positive monitoring activity the value of the firm is
given by V  =  V −F(M,α) −M and the locus of these points for various levels of M and for a
given level of α lie on the line BCE in fig. 3.  The vertical difference between the V F and BCE
curves is M, the current market value of the future monitoring expenditures.
Jensen and Meckling
27
1976
If it is possible for the outside equity holders to make these monitoring expenditures and
thereby to impose the reductions in the owner-manager’s consumption of F, he will voluntarily
enter into a contract with the outside equity holders which gives them the rights to restrict his
consumption of non-pecuniary items to F”.  He finds this desirable because it will cause the value
of the firm to rise to V”  Given the contract, the optimal monitoring expenditure on the part of the
outsiders, M, is the amount D-C.  The entire increase in the value of the firm that accrues will be
reflected in the owner’s wealth, but his welfare will be increased by less than this because he
forgoes some non-pecuniary benefits he previously enjoyed.
Fig. 3.
The value of the firm (V) and level of non-pecuniary benefits (F) when outside equity is (1-α), U1,
U2, U3 represent owner’s indifference curves between wealth and non-pecuniary benefits, and monitoring
(or bonding) activities impose opportunity set BCE as the tradeoff constraint facing the owner.
Jensen and Meckling
28
1976
If the equity market is competitive and makes unbiased estimates of the effects of
monitoring expenditures on F and V, potential buyers will be indifferent between the following two
contracts:
Purchase of a share (1-α) of the firm at a total price of (1-α)V’ and no rights to monitor
or control the manager’s consumption of perquisites.
Purchase of a share (1-α) of the firm at a total price of (1-α)V” and the right to expend
resources up to an amount equal to D-C which will limit the owner-manager’s consumption of
perquisites to F”.
Given the contract (ii) the outside shareholders would find it desirable to monitor to the full
rights of their contract because it will pay them to do so.  However, if the equity market is
competitive the total benefits (net of the monitoring costs) will be capitalized into the price of the
claims.  Thus, not surprisingly, the owner-manager reaps all the benefits of the opportunity to write
and sell the monitoring contract.27
An analysis of bonding expenditures.  We can also see from the analysis of fig. 3 that
it makes no difference who actually makes the monitoring expenditures—the owner bears the full
amount of these costs as a wealth reduction in all cases.  Suppose that the owner-manager could
expend resources to guarantee to the outside equity holders that he would limit his activities which
27 The careful reader will note that point C will be the equilibrium point only if the contract between the
manager and outside equity holders specifies with no ambiguity that they have the right to monitor to limit
his consumption of perquisites to an amount no less than F”.  If any ambiguity regarding these rights exists
in this contract then another source of agency costs arises which is symmetrical to our original problem.  If
they could do so the outside equity holders would monitor to the point where the net value of their
holdings, (1-α)V-M, was maximized, and this would occur when (∂V/∂M)(1-α)-1 = 0 which would be at some
point between points C and E in fig. 3.  Point E denotes the point where the value of the firm net of the
monitoring costs is at a maximum, i.e., where ∂V/∂M-1 = 0.  But the manager would be worse off than in the
zero monitoring solution if the point where (1-α)V-M was at a maximum were to the left of the intersection
between BCE and the indifference curve U3 passing through point B (which denotes the zero monitoring
level of welfare).  Thus if the manager could not eliminate enough of the ambiguity in the contract to push
the equilibrium to the right of the intersection of the curve BCE with indifference curve U3 he would not
engage in any contract which allowed monitoring.
Jensen and Meckling
29
1976
cost the firm F.  We call these expenditures “bonding costs,” and they would take such forms as
contractual guarantees to have the financial accounts audited by a public account, explicit bonding
against malfeasance on the part of the manager, and contractual limitations on the manager’s
decision-making power (which impose costs on the firm because they limit his ability to take full
advantage of some profitable opportunities as well as limiting his ability to harm the stockholders
while making himself better off).
If the incurrence of the bonding costs were entirely under the control of the manager and
if they yielded the same opportunity set BCE for him in fig. 3, he would incur them in amount D-C.
This would limit his consumption of perquisites to F”from F’, and the solution is exactly the same
as if the outside equity holders had performed the monitoring.  The manager finds it in his interest
to incur these costs as long as the net increments in his wealth which they generate (by reducing
the agency costs and therefore increasing the value of the firm) are more valuable than the
perquisites given up.  This optimum occurs at point C in both cases under our assumption that the
bonding expenditures yield the same opportunity set as the monitoring expenditures.  In general, of
course, it will pay the owner-manager to engage in bonding activities and to write contracts which
allow monitoring as long as the marginal benefits of each are greater than their marginal cost.
Optimal scale of the firm in the presence of monitoring and bonding activities.  If
we allow the outside owners to engage in (costly) monitoring activities to limit the manager’s
expenditures on non-pecuniary benefits and allow the manager to engage in bonding activities to
guarantee to the outside owners that he will limit his consumption of F we get an expansion path
such as that illustrated in fig. 4 on which Z and G lie.  We have assumed in drawing fig. 4 that the
cost functions involved in monitoring and bonding are such that some positive levels of the
activities are desirable, i.e., yield benefits greater than their cost.  If this is not true the expansion
path generated by the expenditure of resources on these activities would lie below ZD and no such
Jensen and Meckling
30
1976
activity would take place at any level of investment.  Points Z, C, and D and the two expansion
paths they lie on are identical to those portrayed in fig. 2.  Points Z and C lie on the 100 percent
ownership expansion path, and points Z and D lie on the fractional ownership, zero monitoring and
bonding activity expansion path.
The path on which points Z and G lie is the one given by the locus of equilibrium points for
alternative levels of investment characterized by the point labeled C in fig. 3 which denotes the
optimal level of monitoring and bonding activity and resulting values of the firm and non-pecuniary
benefits to the manager given a fixed level of investment.  If any monitoring or bonding is cost
effective the expansion path on which Z and G lie must be above the non-monitoring expansion
path over some range.  Furthermore, if it lies anywhere to the right of the indifference curve
passing through point D (the zero monitoring-bonding solution) the final solution to the problem will
involve positive amounts of monitoring and/or bonding activities.  Based on the discussion above
we know that as long as the contracts between the manager and outsiders are unambiguous
regarding the rights of the respective parties the final solution will be at that point where the new
expansion path is just tangent to the highest indifference curve.  At this point the optimal level of
monitoring and bonding expenditures are M” and b”; the manager’s post-investment-financing
wealth is given by W + V”-I”-M”-b” and his non-pecuniary benefits are F”.  The total gross
agency costs, A, are given by A(M”, b”, α“, I”) = (V*-I*) - (V”-I”-M”-b”).
2.5 Pareto Optimality and Agency Costs in Manager-Operated Firms
In general we expect to observe both bonding and external monitoring activities, and the
incentives are such that the levels of these activities will satisfy the conditions of efficiency. They
will not, however, result in the firm being run in a manner so as to maximize its value.  The
difference between V*, the efficient solution under zero monitoring and bonding costs (and
Jensen and Meckling
31
1976
therefore zero agency costs), and V”, the value of the firm given positive monitoring costs, are the
total gross agency costs defined earlier in the introduction.  These are the costs of the “separation
of ownership and control” which Adam Smith focused on in the passage quoted at the beginning
of this paper and which Berle and Means (1932) popularized 157 years later. The solutions
outlined above to our highly simplified problem imply that agency costs will be positive as long as
monitoring costs are positive—which they certainly are.
Fig. 4.
Determination of optimal scale of the firm allowing for monitoring and bonding activities.  Optimal
monitoring costs are M” and bonding costs are b” and the equilibrium scale of firm, manager’s wealth and
consumption of non-pecuniary benefits are at point G.
The reduced value of the firm caused by the manager’s consumption of perquisites
outlined above is “non-optimal” or inefficient only in comparison to a world in which we could
obtain compliance of the agent to the principal’s wishes at zero cost or in comparison to a
hypothetical world in which the agency costs were lower.  But these costs (monitoring and
bonding costs and ‘residual loss’) are an unavoidable result of the agency relationship.
Jensen and Meckling
32
1976
Furthermore, since they are borne entirely by the decision maker (in this case the original owner)
responsible for creating the relationship he has the incentives to see that they are minimized
(because he captures the benefits from their reduction).  Furthermore, these agency costs will be
incurred only if the benefits to the owner-manager from their creation are great enough to
outweigh them.  In our current example these benefits arise from the availability of profitable
investments requiring capital investment in excess of the original owner’s personal wealth.
In conclusion, finding that agency costs are non-zero (i.e., that there are costs associated
with the separation of ownership and control in the corporation) and concluding therefrom that the
agency relationship is non-optimal, wasteful or inefficient is equivalent in every sense to comparing
a world in which iron ore is a scarce commodity (and therefore costly) to a world in which it is
freely available at zero resource costs, and concluding that the first world is “non-optimal”—a
perfect example of the fallacy criticized by Coase (1964) and what Demsetz (1969) characterizes
as the “Nirvana” form of analysis.28
2.6 Factors Affecting the Size of the Divergence from Ideal Maximization
The magnitude of the agency costs discussed above will vary from firm to firm.  It will
depend on the tastes of managers, the ease with which they can exercise their own preferences
as opposed to value maximization in decision making, and the costs of monitoring and bonding
activities.29  The agency costs will also depend upon the cost of measuring the manager’s
(agent’s) performance and evaluating it, the cost of devising and applying an index for
28 If we could establish the existence of a feasible set of alternative institutional arrangements which would
yield net benefits from the reduction of these costs we could legitimately conclude the agency relationship
engendered by the corporation was not Pareto optimal.  However, we would then be left with the problem of
explaining why these alternative institutional arrangements have not replaced the corporate form of
organization.
29 The monitoring and bonding costs will differ from firm to firm depending on such things as the inherent
complexity and geographical dispersion of operations, the attractiveness of perquisites available in the firm
(consider the mint), etc.
Jensen and Meckling
33
1976
compensating the manager which correlates with the owner’s (principal’s) welfare, and the cost
of devising and enforcing specific behavioral rules or policies.  Where the manager has less than a
controlling interest in the firm, it will also depend upon the market for managers.  Competition
from other potential managers limits the costs of obtaining managerial services (including the
extent to which a given manager can diverge from the idealized solution which would obtain if all
monitoring and bonding costs were zero).  The size of the divergence (the agency costs) will be
directly related to the cost of replacing the manager.  If his responsibilities require very little
knowledge specialized to the firm, if it is easy to evaluate his performance, and if replacement
search costs are modest, the divergence from the ideal will be relatively small and vice versa.
The divergence will also be constrained by the market for the firm itself, i.e., by capital
markets.  Owners always have the option of selling their firm, either as a unit or piecemeal.
Owners of manager-operated firms can and do sample the capital market from time to time.  If
they discover that the value of the future earnings stream to others is higher than the value of the
firm to them given that it is to be manager-operated, they can exercise their right to sell.  It is
conceivable that other owners could be more efficient at monitoring or even that a single individual
with appropriate managerial talents and with sufficiently large personal wealth would elect to buy
the firm.  In this latter case the purchase by such a single individual would completely eliminate
the agency costs.  If there were a number of such potential owner-manager purchasers (all with
talents and tastes identical to the current manager) the owners would receive in the sale price of
the firm the full value of the residual claimant rights including the capital value of the eliminated
agency costs plus the value of the managerial rights.
Monopoly, competition and managerial behavior.  It is frequently argued that the
existence of competition in product (and factor) markets will constrain the behavior of managers
to idealized value maximization, i.e., that monopoly in product (or monopsony in factor) markets
Jensen and Meckling
34
1976
will permit larger divergences from value maximization.30  Our analysis does not support this
hypothesis. The owners of a firm with monopoly power have the same incentives to limit
divergences of the manager from value maximization (i.e., the ability to increase their wealth) as
do the owners of competitive firms.  Furthermore, competition in the market for managers will
generally make it unnecessary for the owners to share rents with the manager.  The owners of a
monopoly firm need only pay the supply price for a manager.
Since the owner of a monopoly has the same wealth incentives to minimize managerial
costs as would the owner of a competitive firm, both will undertake that level of monitoring which
equates the marginal cost of monitoring to the marginal wealth increment from reduced
consumption of perquisites by the manager.  Thus, the existence of monopoly will not increase
agency costs.
Furthermore the existence of competition in product and factor markets will not eliminate
the agency costs due to managerial control problems as has often been asserted (cf. Friedman,
1970).  If my competitors all incur agency costs equal to or greater than mine I will not be
eliminated from the market by their competition.
The existence and size of the agency costs depends on the nature of the monitoring costs,
the tastes of managers for non-pecuniary benefits and the supply of potential managers who are
capable of financing the entire venture out of their personal wealth.  If monitoring costs are zero,
30 Where competitors are numerous and entry is easy, persistent departures from profit maximizing behavior
inexorably leads to extinction.  Economic natural selection holds the stage.  In these circumstances, the
behavior of the individual units that constitute the supply side of the product market is essentially routine
and uninteresting and economists can confidently predict industry behavior without being explicitly
concerned with the behavior of these individual units.
When the conditions of competition are relaxed, however, the opportunity set of the firm is expanded.  In
this case, the behavior of the firm as a distinct operating unit is of separate interest.  Both for purposes of
interpreting particular behavior within the firm as well as for predicting responses of the industry aggregate,
it may be necessary to identify the factors that influence the firm’s choices within this expanded opportunity
set and embed these in a formal model (Williamson, 1964, p. 2).
Jensen and Meckling
35
1976
agency costs will be zero or if there are enough 100 percent owner-managers available to own
and run all the firms in an industry (competitive or not) then agency costs in that industry will also
be zero.31
3.
Some unanswered questions regarding the existence of the corporate form
3.1  The question
The analysis to this point has left us with a basic puzzle:  Why, given the existence of
positive costs of the agency relationship, do we find the usual corporate form of organization with
widely diffuse ownership so widely prevalent?  If one takes seriously much of the literature
regarding the “discretionary” power held by managers of large corporations, it is difficult to
understand the historical fact of enormous growth in equity in such organizations, not only in the
United States, but throughout the world.  Paraphrasing Alchian (1968):  How does it happen that
millions of individuals are willing to turn over a significant fraction of their wealth to organizations
run by managers who have so little interest in their welfare?  What is even more remarkable, why
are they willing to make these commitments purely as residual claimants, i.e., on the anticipation
that managers will operate the firm so that there will be earnings which accrue to the
stockholders?
There is certainly no lack of alternative ways that individuals might invest, including
entirely different forms of organizations.  Even if consideration is limited to corporate
organizations, there are clearly alternative ways capital might be raised, i.e., through fixed claims
of various sorts, bonds, notes, mortgages, etc.  Moreover, the corporate income tax seems to favor
the use of fixed claims since interest is treated as a tax deductible expense.  Those who assert
31 Assuming there are no special tax benefits to ownership nor utility of ownership other than that derived
from the direct wealth effects of ownership such as might be true for professional sports teams, race horse
stables, firms which carry the family name, etc.
Jensen and Meckling
36
1976
that managers do not behave in the interest of stockholders have generally not addressed a very
important question:  Why, if non-manager-owned shares have such a serious deficiency, have they
not long since been driven out by fixed claims?32
3.2 Some alternative explanations of the ownership structure of the firm
The role of limited liability.  Manne (1967) and Alchian and Demsetz (1972) argue that
one of the attractive features of the corporate form vis-à-vis individual proprietorships or
partnerships is the limited liability feature of equity claims in corporations.  Without this provision
each and every investor purchasing one or more shares of a corporation would be potentially liable
to the full extent of his personal wealth for the debts of the corporation.  Few individuals would
find this a desirable risk to accept and the major benefits to be obtained from risk reduction
through diversification would be to a large extent unobtainable.  This argument, however, is
incomplete since limited liability does not eliminate the basic risk, it merely shifts it.  The argument
must rest ultimately on transaction costs.  If all stockholders of GM were liable for GM’s debts,
the maximum liability for an individual shareholder would be greater than it would be if his shares
had limited liability.  However, given that many other stockholders also existed and that each was
liable for the unpaid claims in proportion to his ownership it is highly unlikely that the maximum
payment each would have to make would be large in the event of GM’s bankruptcy since the total
wealth of those stockholders would also be large.  However, the existence of unlimited liability
would impose incentives for each shareholder to keep track of both the liabilities of GM and the
wealth of the other GM owners.  It is easily conceivable that the costs of so doing would, in the
aggregate, be much higher than simply paying a premium in the form of higher interest rates to the
creditors of GM in return for their acceptance of a contract which grants limited liability to the
32 Marris (1964, pp. 7-9) is the exception, although he argues that there exists some ‘maximum leverage point’
Jensen and Meckling
37
1976
shareholders.  The creditors would then bear the risk of any non-payment of debts in the event of
GM’s bankruptcy.
It is also not generally recognized that limited liability is merely a necessary condition for
explaining the magnitude of the reliance on equities, not a sufficient condition.  Ordinary debt also
carries limited liability.33  If limited liability is all that is required, why don’t we observe large
corporations, individually owned, with a tiny fraction of the capital supplied by the entrepreneur,
and the rest simply borrowed.34  At first this question seems silly to many people (as does the
question regarding why firms would ever issue debt or preferred stock under conditions where
there are no tax benefits obtained from the treatment of interest or preferred dividend
payments.35)  We have found that oftentimes this question is misinterpreted to be one regarding
why firms obtain capital.  The issue is not why they obtain capital, but why they obtain it through
beyond which the chances of “insolvency” are in some undefined sense too high.
33 By limited liability we mean the same conditions that apply to common stock.  Subordinated debt or
preferred stock could be constructed which carried with it liability provisions; i.e., if the corporation’s assets
were insufficient at some point to pay off all prior claims (such as trade credit, accrued wages, senior debt,
etc.) and if the personal resources of the ‘equity’ holders were also insufficient to cover these claims the
holders of this ‘debt’ would be subject to assessments beyond the face value of their claim (assessments
which might be limited or unlimited in amount).
34 Alchian-Demsetz (1972, p. 709) argue that one can explain the existence of both bonds and stock in the
ownership structure of firms as the result of differing expectations regarding the outcomes to the firm.  They
argue that bonds are created and sold to ‘pessimists’ and stocks with a residual claim with no upper bound
are sold to ‘optimists.’
As long as capital markets are perfect with no taxes or transactions costs and individual investors can
issue claims on distributions of outcomes on the same terms as firms, such actions on the part of firms
cannot affect their values. The reason is simple.  Suppose such ‘pessimists’ did exist and yet the firm issues
only equity claims.  The demand for those equity claims would reflect the fact that the individual purchaser
could on his own account issue ‘bonds’ with a limited and prior claim on the distribution of outcomes on the
equity which is exactly the same as that which the firm could issue.  Similarly, investors could easily unlever
any position by simply buying a proportional claim on both the bonds and stocks of a levered firm.
Therefore, a levered firm could not sell at a different price than an unlevered firm solely because of the
existence of such differential expectations. See Fama and Miller (1972, ch. 4) for an excellent exposition of
these issues.
35 Corporations did use both prior to the institution of the corporate income tax in the United States and
preferred dividends have, with minor exceptions, never been tax deductible.
Jensen and Meckling
38
1976
the particular forms we have observed for such long periods of time.  The fact is that no well
articulated answer to this question currently exists in the literature of either finance or economics.
The “irrelevance” of capital structure.  In their pathbreaking article on the cost of
capital, Modigliani and Miller (1958) demonstrated that in the absence of bankruptcy costs and tax
subsidies on the payment of interest the value of the firm is independent of the financial structure.
They later (1963) demonstrated that the existence of tax subsidies on interest payments would
cause the value of the firm to rise with the amount of debt financing by the amount of the
capitalized value of the tax subsidy. But this line of argument implies that the firm should be
financed almost entirely with debt.  Realizing the inconsistence with observed behavior, Modigliani
and Miller (1963, p. 442) comment:
It may be useful to remind readers once again that the existence of a tax advantage for
debt financing . . . does not necessarily mean that corporations should at all times seek to use the
maximum amount of debt in their capital structures . . . there are as we pointed out, limitations
imposed by lenders . . . as well as many other dimensions (and kinds of costs) in real-world
problems of financial strategy which are not fully comprehended within the framework of static
equilibrium models, either our own or those of the traditional variety.  These additional
considerations, which are typically grouped under the rubric of “the need for preserving
flexibility”, will normally imply the maintenance by the corporation of a substantial reserve of
untapped borrowing power.
Modigliani and Miller are essentially left without a theory of the determination of the
optimal capital structure, and Fama and Miller (1972, p. 173) commenting on the same issue
reiterate this conclusion:
Jensen and Meckling
39
1976
And we must admit that at this point there is little in the way of convincing research,
either theoretical or empirical, that explains the amounts of debt that firms do decide to have in
their capital structure.
The Modigliani-Miller theorem is based on the assumption that the probability distribution
of the cash flows to the firm is independent of the capital structure.  It is now recognized that the
existence of positive costs associated with bankruptcy and the presence of tax subsidies on
corporate interest payments will invalidate this irrelevance theorem precisely because the
probability distribution of future cash flows changes as the probability of the incurrence of the
bankruptcy costs changes, i.e., as the ratio of debt to equity rises. We believe the existence of
agency costs provide stronger reasons for arguing that the probability distribution of future cash
flows is not independent of the capital or ownership structure.
While the introduction of bankruptcy costs in the presence of tax subsidies leads to a
theory which defines an optimal capital structure,36 we argue that this theory is seriously
incomplete since it implies that no debt should ever be used in the absence of tax subsidies if
bankruptcy costs are positive.  Since we know debt was commonly used prior to the existence of
the current tax subsidies on interest payments this theory does not capture what must be some
important determinants of the corporate capital structure.
In addition, neither bankruptcy costs nor the existence of tax subsidies can explain the use
of preferred stock or warrants which have no tax advantages, and there is no theory which tells us
anything about what determines the fraction of equity claims held by insiders as opposed to
outsiders which our analysis in section 2 indicates is so important.  We return to these issues later
after analyzing in detail the factors affecting the agency costs associated with debt.
36 See Kraus and Litzenberger (1973) and Lloyd-Davies (1975).
Jensen and Meckling
40
1976
4.    The Agency Costs of Debt
In general if the agency costs engendered by the existence of outside owners are positive
it will pay the absentee owner (i.e., shareholders) to sell out to an owner-manager who can avoid
these costs.37  This could be accomplished in principle by having the manager become the sole
equity holder by repurchasing all of the outside equity claims with funds obtained through the
issuance of limited liability debt claims and the use of his own personal wealth.  This single-owner
corporation would not suffer the agency costs associated with outside equity.  Therefore there
must be some compelling reasons why we find the diffuse-owner corporate firm financed by
equity claims so prevalent as an organizational form.
An ingenious entrepreneur eager to expand, has open to him the opportunity to design a
whole hierarchy of fixed claims on assets and earnings, with premiums paid for different levels of
risk.38  Why don’t we observe large corporations individually owned with a tiny fraction of the
capital supplied by the entrepreneur in return for 100 percent of the equity and the rest simply
borrowed?  We believe there are a number of reasons:  (1) the incentive effects associated with
highly leveraged firms, (2) the monitoring costs these incentive effects engender, and (3)
bankruptcy costs.  Furthermore, all of these costs are simply particular aspects of the agency
costs associated with the existence of debt claims on the firm.
37 And if there is competitive bidding for the firm from potential owner-managers the absentee owner will
capture the capitalized value of these agency costs.
38 The spectrum of claims which firms can issue is far more diverse than is suggested by our two-way
classification—fixed vs. residual.  There are convertible bonds, equipment trust certificates, debentures,
revenue bonds, warrants, etc.  Different bond issues can contain different subordination provisions with
respect to assets and interest. They can be callable or non-callable.  Preferred stocks can be ‘preferred’ in a
variety of dimensions and contain a variety of subordination stipulations.  In the abstract, we can imagine
firms issuing claims contingent on a literally infinite variety of states of the world such as those considered
in the literature on the time-state-preference models of Arrow (1964b), Debreu (1959) and Hirshleifer (1970).
Jensen and Meckling
41
1976
4.1  The Incentive Effects Associated with Debt
We don’t find many large firms financed almost entirely with debt-type claims (i.e., non-
residual claims) because of the effect such a financial structure would have on the owner-
manager’s behavior.  Potential creditors will not loan $100,000,000 to a firm in which the
entrepreneur has an investment of $10,000.  With that financial structure the owner-manager will
have a strong incentive to engage in activities (investments) which promise very high payoffs if
successful even if they have a very low probability of success.  If they turn out well, he captures
most of the gains, if they turn out badly, the creditors bear most of the costs.39
To illustrate the incentive effects associated with the existence of debt and to provide a
framework within which we can discuss the effects of monitoring and bonding costs, wealth
transfers, and the incidence of agency costs, we again consider a simple situation.  Assume we
have a manager-owned firm with no debt outstanding in a world in which there are no taxes.  The
firm has the opportunity to take one of two mutually exclusive equal cost investment opportunities,
each of which yields a random payoff, X j ,T  periods in the future (j = 1,2).  Production and
monitoring activities take place continuously between time 0 and time T, and markets in which the
claims on the firm can be traded are open continuously over this period.  After time T the firm has
no productive activities so the payoff X j  includes the distribution of all remaining assets.  For
simplicity, we assume that the two distributions are log-normally distributed and have the same
expected total payoff, E(X ), where X  is defined as the logarithm of the final payoff.  The
distributions differ only by their variances with
1
2
σ <
2
2
σ .  The systematic or covariance risk of
each of the distributions, βj, in the Sharpe (1964)-Lintner (1965) capital asset pricing model, is
39 An apt analogy is the way one would play poker on money borrowed at a fixed interest rate, with one’s
own liability limited to some very small stake.  Fama and Miller (1972, pp. 179-180) also discuss and provide a
numerical example of an investment decision which illustrates very nicely the potential inconsistency
between the interests of bondholders and stockholders.
Jensen and Meckling
42
1976
assumed to be identical.  Assuming that asset prices are determined according to the capital asset
pricing model, the preceding assumptions imply that the total market value of each of these
distributions is identical, and we represent this value by V.
If the owner-manager has the right to decide which investment program to take, and if
after he decides this he has the opportunity to sell part or all of his claims on the outcomes in the
form of either debt or equity, he will be indifferent between the two investments.40
However, if the owner has the opportunity to first issue debt, then to decide which of the
investments to take, and then to sell all or part of his remaining equity claim on the market, he will
not be indifferent between the two investments. The reason is that by promising to take the low
variance project, selling bonds and then taking the high variance project he can transfer wealth
from the (naive) bondholders to himself as equity holder.
Let X* be the amount of the “fixed” claim in the form of a non-coupon bearing bond sold
to the bondholders such that the total payoff to them Rj(j = 1, 2, denotes the distribution the
manager chooses), is
jR  =  X*,  if   X j  ≥ X*,
      =
j
X ,  if
j
X  ≤ X *.
Let B1 be the current market value of bondholder claims if investment 1 is taken, and let
B2 be the current market value of bondholders claims if investment 2 is taken.  Since in this
example the total value of the firm, V, is independent of the investment choice and also of the
financing decision we can use the Black-Scholes (1973) option pricing model to determine the
40 The portfolio diversification issues facing the owner-manager are brought into the analysis in section 5
below.
Jensen and Meckling
43
1976
values of the debt, Bj, and equity, Sj, under each of the choices.41  Black-Scholes derive the
solution for the value of a European call option (one which can be exercised only at the maturity
date) and argue that the resulting option pricing equation can be used to determine the value of the
equity claim on a leveraged firm.  That is the stockholders in such a firm can be viewed as holding
a European call option on the total value of the firm with exercise price equal to X* (the face
value of the debt), exercisable at the maturity date of the debt issue.  More simply, the
stockholders have the right to buy the firm back from the bondholders for a price of X* at time T.
Merton (1973, 1974) shows that as the variance of the outcome distribution rises the value of the
stock (i.e., call option) rises, and since our two distributions differ only in their variances,
2
2
σ >
1
2
σ ,
the equity value S1 is less than S2.  This implies B1 > B2, since B1 = V-S1, and B2 = V-S2.
Now if the owner-manager could sell bonds with face value X* under the conditions that
the potential bondholders believed this to be a claim on distribution 1, he would receive a price of
B1.  After selling the bonds, his equity interest in distribution 1 would have value S1.  But we know
S2 is greater than S1 and thus the manager can make himself better off by changing the investment
to take the higher variance distribution 2, thereby redistributing wealth from the bondholders to
himself.  All this assumes of course that the bondholders could not prevent him from changing the
investment program.  If the bondholders cannot do so, and if they perceive that the manager
has the opportunity to take distribution 2 they will pay the manager only B2 for the claim
X*, realizing that his maximizing behavior will lead him to choose distribution 2.  In this
event there is no redistribution of wealth between bondholders and stockholders (and in general
with rational expectations there never will be) and no welfare loss.  It is easy to construct a case,
however, in which these incentive effects do generate real costs.
41 See Smith (1976) for a review of this option pricing literature and its applications and Galai and Masulis
(1976) who apply the option pricing model to mergers, and corporate investment decisions.
Jensen and Meckling
44
1976
Let cash flow distribution 2 in the previous example have an expected value, E(X2), which
is lower than that of distribution 1.  Then we know that V1 > V2, and if V, which is given by
V = V1-V2 = (S1-S2) + (B1-B2),
is sufficiently small relative to the reduction in the value of the bonds the value of the stock will
increase.42  Rearranging the expression for V we see that the difference between the equity
values for the two investments is given by
S2-S1 = (B1-B2) - (V1-V2),
and the first term on the RHS, (B1-B2), is the amount of wealth “transferred” from the
bondholders and V1-V2 is the reduction in overall firm value.  Since we know B1 > B2), S2-S1  can
be positive even though the reduction in the value of the firm, V1-V2, is positive.43  Again, the
bondholders will not actually lose as long as they accurately perceive the motivation of the equity
owning manager and his opportunity to take project 2.  They will presume he will take investment
2, and hence will pay no more than B2 for the bonds when they are issued.
42 While we used the option pricing model above to motivate the discussion and provide some intuitive
understanding of the incentives facing the equity holders, the option pricing solutions of Black and Scholes
(1973) do not apply when incentive effects cause V to be a function of the debt/equity ratio as it is in general
and in this example.  Long (1974) points out this difficulty with respect to the usefulness of the model in the
context of tax subsidies on interest and bankruptcy cost. The results of Merton (1974) and Galai and
Masulis (1976) must be interpreted with care since the solutions are strictly incorrect in the context of tax
subsidies and/or agency costs.
43 The numerical example of Fama and Miller (1972, pp. 179-180) is a close representation of this case in a
two-period state model. However, they go on to make the following statement on p. 180:
From a practical viewpoint, however, situations of potential conflict between bondholders and
shareholders in the application of the market value rule are probably unimportant.  In general, investment
opportunities that increase a firm’s market value by more than their cost both increase the value of the firm’s
shares and strengthen the firm’s future ability to meet its current bond commitments.
This first issue regarding the importance of the conflict of interest between bondholders and stockholders
is an empirical one, and the last statement is incomplete—in some circumstances the equity holders could
benefit from projects whose net effect was to reduce the total value of the firm as they and we have
illustrated.  The issue cannot be brushed aside so easily.
Jensen and Meckling
45
1976
In this simple example the reduced value of the firm, V1-V2, is the agency cost engendered
by the issuance of debt44 and it is borne by the owner-manager.  If he could finance the project
out of his personal wealth, he would clearly choose project 1 since its investment outlay was
assumed equal to that of project 2 and its market value, V1, was greater.  This wealth loss, V1-V2,
is the “residual loss” portion of what we have defined as agency costs and it is generated by the
cooperation required to raise the funds to make the investment.  Another important part of the
agency costs are monitoring and bonding costs and we now consider their role.
4.2 The Role of Monitoring and Bonding Costs
In principle it would be possible for the bondholders, by the inclusion of various covenants
in the indenture provisions, to limit the managerial behavior which results in reductions in the value
of the bonds.  Provisions which impose constraints on management’s decisions regarding such
things as dividends, future debt issues,45 and maintenance of working capital are not uncommon in
bond issues.46  To completely protect the bondholders from the incentive effects, these provisions
would have to be incredibly detailed and cover most operating aspects of the enterprise including
limitations on the riskiness of the projects undertaken.  The costs involved in writing such
provisions, the costs of enforcing them and the reduced profitability of the firm (induced because
the covenants occasionally limit management’s ability to take optimal actions on certain issues)
44 Myers (1975) points out another serious incentive effect on managerial decisions of the existence of debt
which does not occur in our simple single decision world.  He shows that if the firm has the option to take
future investment opportunities the existence of debt which matures after the options must be taken will
cause the firm (using an equity value maximizing investment rule) to refuse to take some otherwise profitable
projects because they would benefit only the bondholders and not the equity holders.  This will (in the
absence of tax subsidies to debt) cause the value of the firm to fall.  Thus (although he doesn’t use the term)
these incentive effects also contribute to the agency costs of debt in a manner perfectly consistent with the
examples discussed in the text.
45 Black-Scholes (1973) discuss ways in which dividend and future financing policy can redistribute wealth
between classes of claimants on the firm.
Jensen and Meckling
46
1976
would likely be non-trivial.  In fact, since management is a continuous decision-making process it
will be almost impossible to completely specify such conditions without having the bondholders
actually perform the management function. All costs associated with such covenants are what we
mean by monitoring costs.
The bondholders will have incentives to engage in the writing of such covenants and in
monitoring the actions of the manager to the point where the “nominal” marginal cost to them of
such activities is just equal to the marginal benefits they perceive from engaging in them. We use
the word nominal here because debtholders will not in fact bear these costs. As long as they
recognize their existence, they will take them into account in deciding the price they will pay for
any given debt claim,47 and therefore the seller of the claim (the owner) will bear the costs just as
in the equity case discussed in section 2.
In addition the manager has incentives to take into account the costs imposed on the firm
by covenants in the debt agreement which directly affect the future cash flows of the firm since
they reduce the market value of his claims.  Because both the external and internal monitoring
costs are imposed on the owner-manager it is in his interest to see that the monitoring is
performed in the lowest cost way.  Suppose, for example, that the bondholders (or outside equity
holders) would find it worthwhile to produce detailed financial statements such as those contained
in the usual published accounting reports as a means of monitoring the manager.  If the manager
himself can produce such information at lower costs than they (perhaps because he is already
collecting much of the data they desire for his own internal decision-making purposes), it would
46 Black, Miller and Posner (1978) discuss many of these issues with particular reference to the government
regulation of bank holding companies.
47 In other words, these costs will be taken into account in determining the yield to maturity on the issue.
For an examination of the effects of such enforcement costs on the nominal interest rates in the consumer
small loan market, see Benston (1977).
Jensen and Meckling
47
1976
pay him to agree in advance to incur the cost of providing such reports and to have their accuracy
testified to by an independent outside auditor.  This is an example of what we refer to as bonding
costs.48,49
48 To illustrate the fact that it will sometimes pay the manager to incur ‘bonding’ costs to guarantee the
bondholders that he will not deviate from his promised behavior let us suppose that for an expenditure of $b
of the firm’s resources he can guarantee that project 1 will be chosen.  If he spends these resources and
takes project 1 the value of the firm will be V1-b and clearly as long as (V1-b) > V2, or alternatively (V1-V2) > b
he will be better off, since his wealth will be equal to the value of the firm minus the required investment, I
(which we assumed for simplicity to be identical for the two projects).
On the other hand, to prove that the owner-manager prefers the lowest cost solution to the conflict let us
assume he can write a covenant into the bond issue which will allow the bondholders to prevent him from
taking project 2, if they incur monitoring costs of $m, where m < b.  If he does this his wealth will be higher
by the amount b-m.  To see this note that if the bond market is competitive and makes unbiased estimates,
potential bondholders will be indifferent between:
  (i)
a claim X* with no covenant (and no guarantees from management) at a price of B2,
 (ii)
a claim X* with no covenant (and guarantees from management, through bonding expenditures
by the firm of $b, that project 1 will be taken) at a price of B1, and
(iii)
a claim X* with a covenant and the opportunity to spend m on monitoring (to guarantee
project 1 will be taken) at a price of B1-m.
The bondholders will realize that (i) represents in fact a claim on project 2 and that (ii) and (iii) represent a
claim on project 1 and are thus indifferent between the three options at the specified prices.  The owner-
manager, however, will not be indifferent between incurring the bonding costs, b, directly, or including the
covenant in the bond indenture and letting the bondholders spend m to guarantee that he take project 1.
His wealth in the two cases will be given by the value of his equity plus the proceeds of the bond issue less
the required investment, and if m < b < V1-V2, then his post-investment-financing wealth, W, for the three
options will be such that Wi < Wii < Wiii.  Therefore, since it would increase his wealth, he would voluntarily
include the covenant in the bond issue and let the bondholders monitor.
49 We mention, without going into the problem in detail, that similar to the case in which the outside equity
holders are allowed to monitor the manager-owner, the agency relationship between the bondholders and
stockholders has a symmetry if the rights of the bondholders to limit actions of the manager are not
perfectly spelled out.  Suppose the bondholders, by spending sufficiently large amounts of resources, could
force management to take actions which would transfer wealth from the equity holder to the bondholders
(by taking sufficiently less risky projects).  One can easily construct situations where such actions could
make the bondholders better off, hurt the equity holders and actually lower the total value of the firm.  Given
the nature of the debt contract the original owner-manager might maximize his wealth in such a situation by
selling off the equity and keeping the bonds as his ‘owner’s’ interest.  If the nature of the bond contract is
given, this may well be an inefficient solution since the total agency costs (i.e., the sum of monitoring and
value loss) could easily be higher than the alternative solution.  However, if the owner-manager could
strictly limit the rights of the bondholders (perhaps by inclusion of a provision which expressly reserves all
rights not specifically granted to the bondholder for the equity holder), he would find it in his interest to
establish the efficient contractual arrangement since by minimizing the agency costs he would be maximizing
his wealth.  These issues involve the fundamental nature of contracts and for now we simply assume that
the ‘bondholders’ rights are strictly limited and unambiguous and all rights not specifically granted them are
reserved for the ‘stockholders’; a situation descriptive of actual institutional arrangements.  This allows us
to avoid the incentive effects associated with “bondholders” potentially exploiting ‘stockholders.’
Jensen and Meckling
48
1976
4.3 Bankruptcy and Reorganization Costs
We argue in section 5 that as the debt in the capital structure increases beyond some point
the marginal agency costs of debt begin to dominate the marginal agency costs of outside equity
and the result of this is the generally observed phenomenon of the simultaneous use of both debt
and outside equity.  Before considering these issues, however, we consider here the third major
component of the agency costs of debt which helps to explain why debt doesn’t completely
dominate capital structures—the existence of bankruptcy and reorganization costs.
It is important to emphasize that bankruptcy and liquidation are very different events.  The
legal definition of bankruptcy is difficult to specify precisely.  In general, it occurs when the firm
cannot meet a current payment on a debt obligation,50 or one or more of the other indenture
provisions providing for bankruptcy is violated by the firm. In this event the stockholders have lost
all claims on the firm,51 and the remaining loss, the difference between the face value of the fixed
claims and the market value of the firm, is borne by the debtholders.  Liquidation of the firm’s
assets will occur only if the market value of the future cash flows generated by the firm is less
than the opportunity cost of the assets, i.e., the sum of the values which could be realized if the
assets were sold piecemeal.
If there were no costs associated with the event called bankruptcy the total market value
of the firm would not be affected by increasing the probability of its incurrence.  However, it is
costly, if not impossible, to write contracts representing claims on a firm which clearly delineate
the rights of holders for all possible contingencies.  Thus even if there were no adverse incentive
50 If the firm were allowed to sell assets to meet a current debt obligation, bankruptcy would occur when the
total market value of the future cash flows expected to be generated by the firm is less than the value of a
current payment on a debt obligation.  Many bond indentures do not, however, allow for the sale of assets
to meet debt obligations.
Jensen and Meckling
49
1976
effects in expanding fixed claims relative to equity in a firm, the use of such fixed claims would be
constrained by the costs inherent in defining and enforcing those claims.  Firms incur obligations
daily to suppliers, to employees, to different classes of investors, etc.  So long as the firm is
prospering, the adjudication of claims is seldom a problem.  When the firm has difficulty meeting
some of its obligations, however, the issue of the priority of those claims can pose serious
problems. This is most obvious in the extreme case where the firm is forced into bankruptcy.  If
bankruptcy were costless, the reorganization would be accompanied by an adjustment of the
claims of various parties and the business, could, if that proved to be in the interest of the
claimants, simply go on (although perhaps under new management).52
In practice, bankruptcy is not costless, but generally involves an adjudication process
which itself consumes a fraction of the remaining value of the assets of the firm.  Thus the cost of
bankruptcy will be of concern to potential buyers of fixed claims in the firm since their existence
will reduce the payoffs to them in the event of bankruptcy.  These are examples of the agency
costs of cooperative efforts among individuals (although in this case perhaps “non-cooperative”
would be a better term). The price buyers will be willing to pay for fixed claims will thus be
inversely related to the probability of the incurrence of these costs i.e., to the probability of
bankruptcy.  Using a variant of the argument employed above for monitoring costs, it can be
shown that the total value of the firm will fall, and the owner-manager equity holder will bear the
51 We have been told that while this is true in principle, the actual behavior of the courts appears to
frequently involve the provision of some settlement to the common stockholders even when the assets of
the company are not sufficient to cover the claims of the creditors.
52 If under bankruptcy the bondholders have the right to fire the management, the management will have
some incentives to avoid taking actions which increase the probability of this event (even if it is in the best
interest of the equity holders) if they (the management) are earning rents or if they have human capital
specialized to this firm or if they face large adjustment costs in finding new employment.  A detailed
examination of this issue involves the value of the control rights (the rights to hire and fire the manager) and
we leave it to a subsequent paper.
Jensen and Meckling
50
1976
entire wealth effect of the bankruptcy costs as long as potential bondholders make unbiased
estimates of their magnitude at the time they initially purchase bonds.53
Empirical studies of the magnitude of bankruptcy costs are almost non-existent.  Warner
(1977) in a study of 11 railroad bankruptcies between 1930 and 1955 estimates the average costs
of bankruptcy54 as a fraction of the value of the firm three years prior to bankruptcy to be 2.5%
(with a range of 0.4% to 5.9%).  The average dollar costs were $1.88 million.  Both of these
measures seem remarkably small and are consistent with our belief that bankruptcy costs
themselves are unlikely to be the major determinant of corporate capital structures.  it is also
interesting to note that the annual amount of defaulted funds has fallen significantly since 1940.
(See Atkinson, 1967.)  One possible explanation for this phenomena is that firms are using
mergers to avoid the costs of bankruptcy.  This hypothesis seems even more reasonable, if, as is
frequently the case, reorganization costs represent only a fraction of the costs associated with
bankruptcy.
In general the revenues or the operating costs of the firm are not independent of the
probability of bankruptcy and thus the capital structure of the firm.  As the probability of
bankruptcy increases, both the operating costs and the revenues of the firm are adversely
affected, and some of these costs can be avoided by merger.  For example, a firm with a high
probability of bankruptcy will also find that it must pay higher salaries to induce executives to
accept the higher risk of unemployment.  Furthermore, in certain kinds of durable goods industries
the demand function for the firm’s product will not be independent of the probability of
bankruptcy.  The computer industry is a good example. There, the buyer’s welfare is dependent to
53 Kraus and Litzenberger (1973) and Lloyd-Davies (1975) demonstrate that the total value of the firm will be
reduced by these costs.
Jensen and Meckling
51
1976
a significant extent on the ability to maintain the equipment, and on continuous hardware and
software development.  Furthermore, the owner of a large computer often receives benefits from
the software developments of other users.  Thus if the manufacturer leaves the business or loses
his software support and development experts because of financial difficulties, the value of the
equipment to his users will decline. The buyers of such services have a continuing interest in the
manufacturer’s viability not unlike that of a bondholder, except that their benefits come in the form
of continuing services at lower cost rather than principle and interest payments. Service facilities
and spare parts for automobiles and machinery are other examples.
In summary then the agency costs associated with debt55 consist of:
1. the opportunity wealth loss caused by the impact of debt on the investment decisions
of the firm,
2. the monitoring and bonding expenditures by the bondholders and the owner-manager
(i.e., the firm),
3. the bankruptcy and reorganization costs.
4.4 Why Are the Agency Costs of Debt Incurred?
We have argued that the owner-manager bears the entire wealth effects of the agency
costs of debt and he captures the gains from reducing them.  Thus, the agency costs associated
with debt discussed above will tend, in the absence of other mitigating factors, to discourage the
use of corporate debt.  What are the factors that encourage its use?
One factor is the tax subsidy on interest payments.  (This will not explain preferred stock
where dividends are not tax deductible.)56  Modigliani and Miller (1963) originally demonstrated
54 These include only payments to all parties for legal fees, professional services, trustees’ fees and filing
fees.  They do not include the costs of management time or changes in cash flows due to shifts in the firm’s
demand or cost functions discussed below.
Jensen and Meckling
52
1976
that the use of riskless perpetual debt will increase the total value of the firm (ignoring the agency
costs) by an amount equal to τB, where τ is the marginal and average corporate tax rate and B is
the market value of the debt.  Fama and Miller (1972, ch. 4) demonstrate that for the case of risky
debt the value of the firm will increase by the market value of the (uncertain) tax subsidy on the
interest payments.  Again, these gains will accrue entirely to the equity and will provide an
incentive to utilize debt to the point where the marginal wealth benefits of the tax subsidy are just
equal to the marginal wealth effects of the agency costs discussed above.
However, even in the absence of these tax benefits, debt would be utilized if the ability to
exploit potentially profitable investment opportunities is limited by the resources of the owner.  If
the owner of a project cannot raise capital he will suffer an opportunity loss represented by the
increment in value offered to him by the additional investment opportunities.  Thus even though he
will bear the agency costs from selling debt, he will find it desirable to incur them to obtain
additional capital as long as the marginal wealth increments from the new investments projects are
greater than the marginal agency costs of debt, and these agency costs are in turn less than those
caused by the sale of additional equity discussed in section 2. Furthermore, this solution is optimal
from the social viewpoint.  However, in the absence of tax subsidies on debt these projects must
55 Which, incidentally, exist only when the debt has some probability of default.
56 Our theory is capable of explaining why in the absence of the tax subsidy on interest payments, we would
expect to find firms using both debt and preferred stocks—a problem which has long puzzled at least one of
the authors.  If preferred stock has all the characteristics of debt except for the fact that its holders cannot
put the firm into bankruptcy in the event of nonpayment of the preferred dividends, then the agency costs
associated with the issuance of preferred stock will be lower than those associated with debt by the present
value of the bankruptcy costs.
However, these lower agency costs of preferred stock exist only over some range if as the amount of such
stock rises the incentive effects caused by their existence impose value reductions which are larger than that
caused by debt (including the bankruptcy costs of debt).  There are two reasons for this.  First, the equity
holder’s claims can be eliminated by the debtholders in the event of bankruptcy, and second, the
debtholders have the right to fire the management in the event of bankruptcy.  Both of these will tend to
become more important as an advantage to the issuance of debt as we compare situations with large
amounts of preferred stock to equivalent situations with large amounts of debt because they will tend to
reduce the incentive effects of large amounts of preferred stock.
Jensen and Meckling
53
1976
be unique to this firm57 or they would be taken by other competitive entrepreneurs (perhaps new
ones) who possessed the requisite personal wealth to fully finance the projects58 and therefore
able to avoid the existence of debt or outside equity.
5.    A Theory of the Corporate Ownership Structure
In the previous sections we discussed the nature of agency costs associated with outside
claims on the firm—both debt and equity.  Our purpose here is to integrate these concepts into the
beginnings of a theory of the corporate ownership structure.  We use the term “ownership
structure” rather than “capital structure” to highlight the fact that the crucial variables to be
determined are not just the relative amounts of debt and equity but also the fraction of the equity
held by the manager.  Thus, for a given size firm we want a theory to determine three variables:59
Si : inside equity (held by the manager),
So : outside equity (held by anyone outside of the firm),
B  : debt (held by anyone outside of the firm).
57 One other condition also has to hold to justify the incurrence of the costs associated with the use of debt
or outside equity in our firm.  If there are other individuals in the economy who have sufficiently large
amounts of personal capital to finance the entire firm, our capital constrained owner can realize the full
capital value of his current and prospective projects and avoid the agency costs by simply selling the firm
(i.e., the right to take these projects) to one of these individuals.  He will then avoid the wealth losses
associated with the agency costs caused by the sale of debt or outside equity.  If no such individuals exist,
it will pay him (and society) to obtain the additional capital in the debt market.  This implies, incidentally,
that it is somewhat misleading to speak of the owner-manager as the individual who bears the agency costs.
One could argue that it is the project which bears the costs since, if it is not sufficiently profitable to cover
all the costs (including the agency costs), it will not be taken.  We continue to speak of the owner-manager
bearing these costs to emphasize the more correct and important point that he has the incentive to reduce
them because, if he does, his wealth will be increased.
58 We continue to ignore for the moment the additional complicating factor involved with the portfolio
decisions of the owner, and the implied acceptance of potentially diversifiable risk by such 100% owners in
this example.
59 We continue to ignore such instruments as convertible bonds and warrants.
Jensen and Meckling
54
1976
The total market value of the equity is S = Si+So, and the total market value of the firm is
V = S+B.  In addition, we also wish to have a theory which determines the optimal size of the
firm, i.e., its level of investment.
5.1 Determination of the Optimal Ratio of Outside Equity to Debt
Consider first the determination of the optimal ratio of outside equity to debt, So/B.  To do
this let us hold the size of the firm constant.  V, the actual value of the firm for a given size, will
depend on the agency costs incurred, hence we use as our index of size V*, the value of the firm
at a given scale when agency costs are zero.  For the moment we also hold the amount of outside
financing (B+So), constant.  Given that a specified amount of financing (B+So) is to be obtained
externally our problem is to determine the optimal fraction E*  ≡
o
*
S /(B + So) to be financed with
equity.
We argued above that:  (1) as long as capital markets are efficient (i.e., characterized by
rational expectations) the prices of assets such as debt and outside equity will reflect unbiased
estimates of the monitoring costs and redistributions which the agency relationship will engender,
and (2) the selling owner-manager will bear these agency costs.  Thus from the owner-manager’s
standpoint the optimal proportion of outside funds to be obtained from equity (versus debt) for a
given level of internal equity is that E which results in minimum total agency costs.
Fig. 5 presents a breakdown of the agency costs into two separate components:  Define
ASo(E) as the total agency costs (a function of E) associated with the ‘exploitation’ of the outside
equity holders by the owner-manager, and AB(E) as the total agency costs associated with the
presence of debt in the ownership structure. Aτ(E) = ASo(E) + AB(E) is the total agency cost.
Jensen and Meckling
55
1976
Fig. 5.
Total agency costs, Aτ(E), as a function of the ratio of outside equity, to total outside financing, E
≡ So/(B+So), for a given firm size V* and given total amounts of outside financing (B+So).  ASo(E) ≡ agency
costs associated with outside equity.  AB(E) ≡ agency costs associated with debt, B. AT(E*) = minimum total
agency costs at optimal fraction of outside financing E*.
Consider the function ASo(E).  When E ≡ So/(B+So) is zero, i.e., when there is no outside
equity, the manager’s incentives to exploit the outside equity is at a minimum (zero) since the
changes in the value of the total equity are equal to the changes in his equity.60  As E increases to
100 percent his incentives to exploit the outside equity holders increase and hence the agency
costs ASo(E) increase.
60 Note, however, that even when outsiders own none of the equity the stockholder-manager still has some
incentives to engage in activities which yield him non-pecuniary benefits but reduce the value of the firm by
more than he personally values the benefits if there is any risky debt outstanding.  Any such actions he
takes which reduce the value of the firm, V, tend to reduce the value of the bonds as well as the value of the
equity.  Although the option pricing model does not in general apply exactly to the problem of valuing the
debt and equity of the firm, it can be useful in obtaining some qualitative insights into matters such as this.
In the option pricing model ∂S/∂V indicates the rate at which the stock value changes per dollar change in
the value of the firm (and similarly for ∂S/∂V).  Both of these terms are less than unity (cf. Black and Scholes,
1973).  Therefore, any action of the manager which reduces the value of the firm, V, tends to reduce the
value of both the stock and the bonds, and the larger is the total debt/equity ratio the smaller is the impact
of any given change in V on the value of the equity, and therefore, the lower is the cost to him of consuming
non-pecuniary benefits.
Jensen and Meckling
56
1976
The agency costs associated with the existence of debt, AB(E) are composed mainly of
the value reductions in the firm and monitoring costs caused by the manager’s incentive to
reallocate wealth from the bondholders to himself by increasing the value of his equity claim.
They are at a maximum where all outside funds are obtained from debt, i.e., where So = E = 0.
As the amount of debt declines to zero these costs also go to zero because as E goes to 1, his
incentive to reallocate wealth from the bondholders to himself falls.  These incentives fall for two
reasons:  (1) the total amount of debt falls, and therefore it is more difficult to reallocate any given
amount away from the debtholders, and (2) his share of any reallocation which is accomplished is
falling since So is rising and therefore Si/(So+Si), his share of the total equity, is falling.
The curve Aτ(E) represents the sum of the agency costs from various combinations of
outside equity and debt financing, and as long as ASo(E) and AB(E) are as we have drawn them
the minimum total agency cost for given size firm and outside financing will occur at some point
such as Aτ(E*) with a mixture of both debt and equity.61
A caveat.  Before proceeding further we point out that the issue regarding the exact
shapes of the functions drawn in fig. 5 and several others discussed below is essentially an open
question at this time.  In the end the shape of these functions is a question of fact and can only be
settled by empirical evidence.  We outline some a priori arguments which we believe lead to some
plausible hypotheses about the behavior of the system, but confess that we are far from
understanding the many conceptual subtleties of the problem. We are fairly confident of our
arguments regarding the signs of the first derivatives of the functions, but the second derivatives
are also important to the final solution and much more work (both theoretical and empirical) is
required before we can have much confidence regarding these parameters. We anticipate the
61 This occurs, of course, not at the intersection of ASo(E) and AB(E), but at the point where the absolute
value oft he slopes of the functions are equal, i.e., where A’So(E)+A’B(E) = 0.
Jensen and Meckling
57
1976
work of others as well as our own to cast more light on these issues.  Moreover, we suspect the
results of such efforts will generate revisions to the details of what follows. We believe it is
worthwhile to delineate the overall framework in order to demonstrate, if only in a simplified
fashion, how the major pieces of the puzzle fit together into a cohesive structure.
5.2 Effects of the Scale of Outside Financing
In order to investigate the effects of increasing the amount of outside financing, B+So, and
therefore reducing the amount of equity held by the manager, Si, we continue to hold the scale of
the firm, V*, constant.  Fig. 6 presents a plot of the agency cost functions ASo(E), AB(E) and Aτ(E)
= ASo(E)+AB(E), for two different levels of outside financing.  Define an index of the amount of
outside financing to be
K = (B + So)/V*,
and consider two different possible levels of outside financing Ko and K1 for a given scale of the
firm such that Ko < K1.
As the amount of outside equity increases, the owner’s fractional claim on the firm, α,
falls.  He will be induced thereby to take additional non-pecuniary benefits out of the firm because
his share of the cost falls.  This also increases the marginal benefits from monitoring activities and
therefore will tend to increase the optimal level of monitoring.  Both of these factors will cause the
locus of agency costs ASo(E;K) to shift upward as the fraction of outside financing, K, increases.
This is depicted in fig. 6 by the two curves representing the agency costs of equity, one for the
low level of outside financing, ASo(E;Ko), the other for the high level of outside financing,
ASo(E;K1).  The locus of the latter lies above the former everywhere except at the origin where
both are 0.
Jensen and Meckling
58
1976
Fig. 6.
Agency cost functions and optimal outside equity as a fraction of total outside financing, E*(K),
for two different levels of outside financing.  K, for a given size firm, V* : K1 > Ko.
The agency cost of debt will similarly rise as the amount of outside financing increases.
This means that the locus of AB(E;K1) for high outside financing, K1, will lie above the locus of
AB(E;Ko) for low outside financing, Ko because the total amount of resources which can be
reallocated from bondholders increases as the total amount of debt increases.  However, since
these costs are zero when the debt is zero for both Ko and K1 the intercepts of the AB(E;K)
curves coincide at the right axis.
The net effect of the increased use of outside financing given the cost functions assumed
in fig. 6 is to:  (1) increase the total agency costs from Aτ(E*;Ko) to Aτ(E*;K1), and (2) to
increase the optimal fraction of outside funds obtained from the sale of outside equity.  We draw
these functions for illustration only and are unwilling to speculate at this time on the exact form of
Jensen and Meckling
59
1976
E*(K) which gives the general effects of increasing outside financing on the relative quantities of
debt and equity.
The locus of points Aτ(E*;K) where agency costs are minimized (not drawn in fig. 6),
determines E*(K), the optimal proportions of equity and debt to be used in obtaining outside funds
as the fraction of outside funds, K, ranges from 0 to 100 percent.  The solid line in fig. 7 is a plot
of the minimum total agency costs as a function of the amount of outside financing for a firm with
scale
o
*
V .  The dotted line shows the total agency costs for a larger firm with scale
1
*
V  >
o
*
V .
That is, we hypothesize that the larger the firm becomes the larger are the total agency costs
because it is likely that the monitoring function is inherently more difficult and expensive in a larger
organization.
Fig. 7.
Total agency costs as a function of the fraction of the firm financed by outside claims for two firm
sizes,
1
*
V  >
o
*
V .
Jensen and Meckling
60
1976
5.3 Risk and the Demand for Outside Financing
The model we have used to explain the existence of minority shareholders and debt in the
capital structure of corporations implies that the owner-manager, if he resorts to any outside
funding, will have his entire wealth invested in the firm.  The reason is that he can thereby avoid
the agency costs which additional outside funding impose. This suggests he would not resort to
outside funding until he had invested 100 percent of his personal wealth in the firm—an implication
which is not consistent with what we generally observe.  Most owner-managers hold personal
wealth in a variety of forms, and some have only a relatively small fraction of their wealth
invested in the corporation they manage.62  Diversification on the part of owner-managers can be
explained by risk aversion and optimal portfolio selection.
If the returns from assets are not perfectly correlated an individual can reduce the
riskiness of the returns on his portfolio by dividing his wealth among many different assets, i.e., by
diversifying.63   Thus a manager who invests all of his wealth in a single firm (his own) will
generally bear a welfare loss (if he is risk averse) because he is bearing more risk than necessary.
He will, of course, be willing to pay something to avoid this risk, and the costs he must bear to
accomplish this diversification will be the agency costs outlined above.  He will suffer a wealth
loss as he reduces his fractional ownership because prospective shareholders and bondholders will
take into account the agency costs. Nevertheless, the manager’s desire to avoid risk will
contribute to his becoming a minority stockholder.
62 On the average, however, top managers seem to have substantial holdings in absolute dollars.  A recent
survey by Wytmar (1974, p. 1) reported that the median value of 826 chief executive officers’ stock holdings
in their companies at year end 1973 and $557,000 and $1.3 million at year end 1972.
63 These diversification effects can be substantial.  Evans and Archer (1968) show that on the average for
New York Stock Exchange securities approximately 55% of the total risk (as measured by standard deviation
of portfolio returns) can be eliminated by following a naive strategy of dividing one’s assets equally among
40 randomly selected securities.
Jensen and Meckling
61
1976
5.4 Determination of the Optimal Amount of Outside Financing, K*
Assume for the moment that the owner of a project (i.e., the owner of a prospective firm)
has enough wealth to finance the entire project himself.  The optimal scale of the corporation is
then determined by the condition that, ∆V-∆I = 0.  In general if the returns to the firm are
uncertain the owner-manager can increase his welfare by selling off part of the firm either as debt
or equity and reinvesting the proceeds in other assets.  If he does this with the optimal combination
of debt and equity (as in fig. 6) the total wealth reduction he will incur is given by the agency cost
function, Aτ(E*,K;V*) in fig. 7. The functions Aτ(E*,K;V*) will be S shaped (as drawn) if total
agency costs for a given scale of firm increase at an increasing rate at low levels of outside
financing, and at a decreasing rate for high levels of outside financing as monitoring imposes more
and more constraints on the manager’s actions.
Figure 8 shows marginal agency costs as a function of K, the fraction of the firm financed
with outside funds assuming the total agency cost function is as plotted in fig. 7, and assuming the
scale of the firm is fixed. The demand by the owner-manager for outside financing is shown by
the remaining curve in fig. 8.  This curve represents the marginal value of the increased
diversification which the manager can obtain by reducing his ownership claims and optimally
constructing a diversified portfolio.  It is measured by the amount he would pay to be allowed to
reduce his ownership claims by a dollar in order to increase his diversification. If the liquidation of
some of his holdings also influences the owner-manager’s consumption set, the demand function
plotted in fig. 8 also incorporates the marginal value of these effects. The intersection of these two
schedules determines the optimal fraction of the firm to be held by outsiders and this in turn
determines the total agency costs borne by the owner.  This solution is Pareto optimal; there is no
way to reduce the agency costs without making someone worse off.
Jensen and Meckling
62
1976
Fig. 8.
Determination of the optimal amount of outside financing, K*, for a given scale of firm.
5.5 Determination of the Optimal Scale of the Firm
While the details of the solution of the optimal scale of the firm are complicated when we
allow for the issuance of debt, equity and monitoring and bonding, the general structure of the
solution is analogous to the case where monitoring and bonding are allowed for the outside equity
example (see fig. 4).
If it is optimal to issue any debt, the expansion path taking full account of such
opportunities must lie above the curve ZG in fig. 4.  If this new expansion path lies anywhere to
the right of the indifference curve passing through point G debt will be used in the optimal
financing package.  Furthermore, the optimal scale of the firm will be determined by the point at
which this new expansion path touches the highest indifference curve.  In this situation the
resulting level of the owner-manager’s welfare must therefore be higher.
Jensen and Meckling
63
1976
6.    Qualifications and Extensions of the Analysis
6.1 Multiperiod aspects of the agency problem
We have assumed throughout our analysis that we are dealing only with a single
investment–financing decision by the entrepreneur and have ignored the issues associated with the
incentives affecting future financing–investment decisions which might arise after the initial set of
contracts are consummated between the entrepreneur–manager, outside stockholders and
bondholders.  These are important issues which are left for future analysis.64  Their solution will
undoubtedly introduce some changes in the conclusions of the single decision analysis.  It seems
clear, for instance, that the expectation of future sales of outside equity and debt will change the
costs and benefits facing the manager in making decisions which benefit himself at the (short–run)
expense of the current bondholders and stockholders.  If he develops a reputation for such
dealings, he can expect this to unfavorably influence the terms at which he can obtain future
capital from outside sources.  This will tend to increase the benefits associated with “sainthood”
and will tend to reduce the size of the agency costs.  Given the finite life of any individual,
however, such an effect cannot reduce these costs to zero, because at some point these future
costs will begin to weigh more heavily on his successors and therefore the relative benefits to him
of acting in his own best interests will rise.65  Furthermore, it will generally be impossible for him
to fully guarantee the outside interests that his successor will continue to follow his policies.
64 The recent work of Myers (1975) which views future investment opportunities as options and investigates
the incentive effects of the existence of debt in such a world where a sequence of investment decisions is
made is another important step in the investigation of the multiperiod aspects of the agency problem and the
theory of the firm.
65 Becker and Stigler (1972) analyze a special case of this problem involving the use of nonvested pension
rights to help correct for this end game play in the law enforcement area.
Jensen and Meckling
64
1976
6.2 The Control Problem and Outside Owner’s Agency Costs
The careful reader will notice that nowhere in the analysis thus far have we taken into
account many of the details of the relationship between the part owner–manager and the outside
stockholders and bondholders.  In particular, we have assumed that all outside equity is nonvoting.
If such equity does have voting rights, then the manager will be concerned about the effects on his
long–run welfare of reducing his fractional ownership below the point where he loses effective
control of the corporation.  That is, below the point where it becomes possible for the outside
equity holders to fire him.  A complete analysis of this issue will require a careful specification of
the contractual rights involved on both sides, the role of the board of directors, and the
coordination (agency) costs borne by the stockholders in implementing policy changes.  This latter
point involves consideration of the distribution of the outside ownership claims.  Simply put, forces
exist to determine an equilibrium distribution of outside ownership.  If the costs of reducing the
dispersion of ownership are lower than the benefits to be obtained from reducing the agency costs,
it will pay some individual or group of individuals to buy shares in the market to reduce the
dispersion of ownership.  We occasionally witness these conflicts for control which involve
outright market purchases, tender offers, and proxy fights.  Further analysis of these issues is left
to the future.
6.3 A Note on the Existence of Inside Debt and Some Conjectures on the Use of Convertible
Financial Instruments
We have been asked66 why debt held by the manager (i.e., “inside debt”) plays no role in
our analysis.  We have as yet been unable to incorporate this dimension formally into our analysis
in a satisfactory way.  The question is a good one and suggests some potentially important
66  By our colleague David Henderson.
Jensen and Meckling
65
1976
extensions of the analysis.  For instance, it suggests an inexpensive way for the owner–manager
with both equity and debt outstanding to eliminate a large part (perhaps all) of the agency costs of
debt.  If he binds himself contractually to hold a fraction of the total debt equal to his fractional
ownership of the total equity he would have no incentive whatsoever to reallocate wealth from the
debt holders to the stockholders.  Consider the case where
Bi/Si  =  Bo /So,
(4)
where Si and So are as defined earlier, Bi is the dollar value of the inside debt held by the owner–
manager, and Bo is the debt held by outsiders.  In this case, if the manager changes the investment
policy of the firm to reallocate wealth between the debt and equity holders, the net effect on the
total value of his holdings in the firm will be zero.  Therefore, his incentives to perform such
reallocations are zero.67
Why then don’t we observe practices or formal contracts which accomplish this
elimination or reduction of the agency costs of debt?  Maybe we do for smaller privately held
firms (we haven’t attempted to obtain this data), but for large diffuse owner corporations the
practice does not seem to be common.  One reason for this we believe is that in some respects
the claim that the manager holds on the firm in the form of his wage contract has some of the
characteristics of debt.68  If true, this implies that even with zero holdings of formal debt claims he
still has positive holdings of a quasi–debt claim and this may accomplish the satisfaction of
condition (4).  The problem here is that any formal analysis of this issue requires a much deeper
67 This also suggests that some outside debt holders can protect themselves from ‘exploitation’ by the
manager by purchasing a fraction of the total equity equal to their fractional ownership of the debt.  All debt
holders, of course, cannot do this unless the manager does so also.  In addition, such an investment rule
restricts the portfolio choices of investors and therefore would impose costs if followed rigidly.  Thus the
agency costs will not be eliminated this way either.
68 Consider the situation in which the bondholders have the right in the event of bankruptcy to terminate his
employment and therefore to terminate the future returns to any specific human capital or rents he may be
receiving.
Jensen and Meckling
66
1976
understanding of the relationship between formal debt holdings and the wage contract; i.e., how
much debt is it equivalent to?
This line of thought also suggests some other interesting issues.  Suppose the implicit debt
characteristics of the manager’s wage contract result in a situation equivalent to
Bi/Si  =>  Bo /So.
Then he would have incentives to change the operating characteristics of the firm (i.e.,
reduce the variance of the outcome distribution) to transfer wealth from the stockholders to the
debt holders which is the reverse of the situation we examined in section 4.  Furthermore, this
seems to capture some of the concern often expressed regarding the fact that managers of large
publicly held corporations seem to behave in a risk–averse way to the detriment of the equity
holders.  One solution to this would be to establish incentive compensation systems for the
manager or to give him stock options which in effect give him a claim on the upper tail of the
outcome distribution.  This also seems to be a commonly observed phenomenon.
This analysis also suggests some additional issues regarding the costs and benefits
associated with the use of more complicated financial claims such as warrants, convertible bonds,
and convertible preferred stock which we have not formally analyzed as yet.  Warrants,
convertible bonds, and convertible preferred stock have some of the characteristics of non–voting
shares although they can be converted into voting shares under some terms.  Alchian–Demsetz
(1972) provide an interesting analysis regarding the use of non–voting shares.  They argue that
some shareholders with strong beliefs in the talents and judgments of the manager will want to be
protected against the possibility that some other shareholders will take over and limit the actions of
the manager (or fire him).  Given that the securities exchanges prohibit the use of non–voting
shares by listed firms, the use of the option–type securities might be a substitute for these claims.
Jensen and Meckling
67
1976
In addition, warrants represent a claim on the upper tail of the distribution of outcomes,
and convertible securities can be thought of as securities with non–detachable warrants.  It seems
that the incentive effect of warrants would tend to offset to some extent the incentive effects of
the existence of risky debt because the owner–manager would be sharing part of the proceeds
associated with a shift in the distribution of returns with the warrant holders.  Thus, we conjecture
that potential bondholders will find it attractive to have warrants attached to the risky debt of firms
in which it is relatively easy to shift the distribution of outcomes to expand the upper tail of the
distribution to transfer wealth from bondholders.  It would also then be attractive to the owner–
manager because of the reduction in the agency costs which he would bear.  This argument also
implies that it would make little difference if the warrants were detachable (and therefore saleable
separately from the bonds) since their mere existence would reduce the incentives of the manager
(or stockholders) to increase the riskiness of the firm (and therefore increase the probability of
bankruptcy).  Furthermore, the addition of a conversion privilege to fixed claims such as debt or
preferred stock would also tend to reduce the incentive effects of the existence of such fixed
claims and therefore lower the agency costs associated with them.  The theory predicts that these
phenomena should be more frequently observed in cases where the incentive effects of such fixed
claims are high than when they are low.
6.4 Monitoring and the Social Product of Security Analysts
One of the areas in which further analysis is likely to lead to high payoffs is that of
monitoring.  We currently have little which could be glorified by the title of a “Theory of
Monitoring” and yet this is a crucial building block of the analysis.  We would expect monitoring
activities to become specialized to those institutions and individuals who possess comparative
advantages in these activities.  One of the groups who seem to play a large role in these activities
is composed of the security analysts employed by institutional investors, brokers and investment
Jensen and Meckling
68
1976
advisory services as well as the analysis performed by individual investors in the normal course of
investment decision making.
A large body of evidence exists which indicates that security prices incorporate in an
unbiased manner all publicly available information and much of what might be called “private
information”.69  There is also a large body of evidence which indicates that the security analysis
activities of mutual funds and other institutional investors are not reflected in portfolio returns, i.e.,
they do not increase risk–adjusted portfolio returns over a naive random selection buy–and–hold
strategy.70  Therefore, some have been tempted to conclude that the resources expended on such
research activities to find under– or over–valued securities is a social loss.  Jensen (1979) argues
that this conclusion cannot be unambiguously drawn because there is a large consumption element
in the demand for these services.
Furthermore, the analysis of this paper would seem to indicate that to the extent that
security analysis activities reduce the agency costs associated with the separation of ownership
and control, they are indeed socially productive.  Moreover, if this is true, we expect the major
benefits of the security analysis activity to be reflected in the higher capitalized value of the
ownership claims to corporations and not in the period–to–period portfolio returns of the analyst.
Equilibrium in the security analysis industry requires that the private returns to analysis (i.e.,
portfolio returns) must be just equal to the private costs of such activity,71 and this will not reflect
the social product of this activity which will consist of larger output and higher levels of the capital
value of ownership claims.  Therefore, the argument implies that if there is a non–optimal amount
69  See Fama (1970a) for a survey of this ‘efficient markets’ literature.
70  See Jensen (1969) for an example of this evidence and references.
71 Ignoring any pure consumption elements in the demand for security analysis
Jensen and Meckling
69
1976
of security analysis being performed, it is too much72 not too little (since the shareholders would be
willing to pay directly to have the “optimal” monitoring performed), and we don’t seem to observe
such payments.
6.5 Specialization in the Use of Debt and Equity
Our previous analysis of agency costs suggests at least one other testable hypothesis:  i.e.,
that in those industries where the incentive effects of outside equity or debt are widely different,
we would expect to see specialization in the use of the low agency cost financing arrangement.  In
industries where it is relatively easy for managers to lower the mean value of the outcomes of the
enterprise by outright theft, special treatment of favored customers, ease of consumption of leisure
on the job, etc. (for example, the bar and restaurant industry), we would expect to see the
ownership structure of firms characterized by relatively little outside equity (i.e., 100 percent
ownership of the equity by the manager) with almost all outside capital obtained through the use of
debt.
The theory predicts the opposite would be true where the incentive effects of debt are
large relative to the incentive effects of equity.  Firms like conglomerates, in which it would be
easy to shift outcome distributions adversely for bondholders (by changing the acquisition or
divestiture policy) should be characterized by relatively lower utilization of debt.  Conversely, in
industries where the freedom of management to take riskier projects is severely constrained (for
example, regulated industries such as public utilities), we should find more intensive use of debt
financing.
The analysis suggests that in addition to the fairly well–understood role of uncertainty in
the determination of the quality of collateral, there is at least one other element of great
72 Again ignoring the value of the pure consumption elements in the demand for security analysis.
Jensen and Meckling
70
1976
importance—the ability of the owner of the collateral to change the distribution of outcomes by
shifting either the mean outcome or the variance of the outcomes.  A study of bank lending
policies should reveal these to be important aspects of the contractual practices observed there.
6.6 Application of the Analysis to the Large Diffuse Ownership Corporation
While we believe the structure outlined in the proceeding pages is applicable to a wide
range of corporations, it is still in an incomplete state.  One of the most serious limitations of the
analysis is that, as it stands, we have not worked out in this paper its application to the very large
modern corporation whose managers own little or no equity.  We believe our approach can be
applied to this case, but space limitations preclude discussion of these issues here.  They remain to
be worked out in detail and will be included in a future paper.
6.7  The Supply Side of the Incomplete Markets Question
The analysis of this paper is also relevant to the incomplete market issue considered by
Arrow (1964a), Diamond (1967), Hakansson (1974a, 1974b), Rubinstein (1974), Ross (1974b), and
others.  The problems addressed in this literature derive from the fact that whenever the available
set of financial claims on outcomes in a market fails to span the underlying state space (see
Arrow, 1964a,  andDebreu, 1959) the resulting allocation is Pareto inefficient.  A disturbing
element in this literature surrounds the fact that the inefficiency conclusion is generally drawn
without explicit attention in the analysis to the costs of creating new claims or of maintaining the
expanded set of markets called for to bring about the welfare improvement.
The demonstration of a possible welfare improvement from the expansion of the set of
claims by the introduction of new basic contingent claims or options can be thought of as an
analysis of the demand conditions for new markets.  Viewed from this perspective, what is
missing in the literature on this problem is the formulation of a positive analysis of the supply of
Jensen and Meckling
71
1976
markets (or the supply of contingent claims).  That is, what is it in the maximizing behavior of
individuals in the economy that causes them to create and sell contingent claims of various sorts?
The analysis in this paper can be viewed as a small first step in the direction of
formulating an analysis of the supply of markets issue which is founded in the self–interested
maximizing behavior of individuals.  We have shown why it is in the interest of a wealth–
maximizing entrepreneur to create and sell claims such as debt and equity.  Furthermore, as we
have indicated above, it appears that extensions of these arguments will lead to a theory of the
supply of warrants, convertible bonds, and convertible preferred stock.  We are not suggesting
that the specific analysis offered above is likely to be sufficient to lead to a theory of the supply of
the wide range of contracts (both existing and merely potential) in the world at large.  However,
we do believe that framing the question of the completeness of markets in terms of the joining of
both the demand and supply conditions will be very fruitful instead of implicitly assuming that new
claims spring forth from some (costless) well head of creativity unaided or unsupported by human
effort.
7.    Conclusions
The publicly held business corporation is an awesome social invention.  Millions of
individuals voluntarily entrust billions of dollars, francs, pesos, etc. of personal wealth to the care
of managers on the basis of a complex set of contracting relationships which delineate the rights
of the parties involved.  The growth in the use of the corporate form as well as the growth in
market value of established corporations suggests that at least, up to the present, creditors and
investors have by and large not been disappointed with the results, despite the agency costs
inherent in the corporate form.
Jensen and Meckling
72
1976
Agency costs are as real as any other costs.  The level of agency costs depends, among
other things, on statutory and common law and human ingenuity in devising contracts.  Both the
law and the sophistication of contracts relevant to the modern corporation are the products of a
historical process in which there were strong incentives for individuals to minimize agency costs.
Moreover, there were alternative organizational forms available, and opportunities to invent new
ones.  Whatever its shortcomings, the corporation has thus far survived the market test against
potential alternatives.
References
Alchian, Armen A. (1965). “The Basis of Some Recent Advances in the Theory of Management
of the Firm.” Journal of Industrial Economics (November): 30-44.
Alchian, Armen A. (1968). Corporate Management and Property Rights. Economic Policy and
the Regulation of Securities, Washington, D.C., American Enterprise Institute.
Alchian, Armen A. (1974). Some Implications of Recognition of Property Right Transaction
Costs. First Interlaken Conference on Analysis and Ideology.
Alchian, Armen A. and W.R. Allen (1969). Exchange and Production: Theory in Use.
Belmont, CA, Wadsworth.
Alchian, Armen A. and Harold Demsetz (1972). “Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization.” American Economic Review  LXII, no. 5 (December): 777-795.
Alchian, Armen. A. and R.A. Kessel (1962). “Competition, Monopoly, and the Pursuit of
Pecuniary Gain”. Aspects of Labor Economics. Princeton, NJ, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1964a). “Control in Large Organizations.” Management Science 10 (April):
397-408.
Arrow, Kenneth J. (1964b). “The Role of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of Risk Bearing.”
Review of Economic Studies  31, no. 86 (January): 91-96.
Atkinson, T.R. (1967). “Trends in Corporate Bond Quality”. Studies in Corporate Bond
Finance 4. New York:, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Baumol, W.J. (1959). Business Behavior, Value and Growth. New York, Macmillan.
Jensen and Meckling
73
1976
Becker, Gary S. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago
Press.
Becker, Gary S. and George J. Stigler (1972). Law Enforcement, Corruption, and
Compensation of Enforcers. Conference on Capitalism and Freedom.
Benston, George J. (1977). “The Impact of Maturity Regulation on High Interest Rate Lenders
and Borrowers.” Journal of Financial Economics  4 no. 1 .
Berhold, M. (1971). “A Theory of Linear Profit Sharing Incentives.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics  LXXXV (August): 460-482.
Berle, Adolf A. and Gardiner C. Means (1932). The Modern Corporation and Private
Property. New York, Macmillan Publishing Co.
Black, F., H. Merton, M.H. Miller, et al. (1978). “An Approach to the Regulation of Bank Holding
Companies.” Journal of Business 51 (3): 379-412.
Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973). “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities.” Journal of
Political Economy  81, no. 3 : 637-654.
Branch, B. (1973). “Corporate Objectives and Market Performance.” Financial Management
(Summer): 24-29.
Coase, Ronald H. (1937). “The Nature of the Firm”. Readings in Price Theory. Homewood, IL,
Irwin. New Series, V: 331-351.
Coase, Ronald H. (1959). “The Federal Communications Commission.” Journal of Law and
Economics  II (October): 1-40.
Coase, Ronald H. (1960). “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics III
(October): 1-44.
Coase, Ronald H. (1964). “Discussion.” American Economic Review  LIV, no. 3 : 194-197.
Cyert, R.M. and C.L. Hedrick (1972). “Theory of the Firm:  Past, Present and Future: An
Interpretation.” Journal of Economic Literature  X (June): 398-412.
Cyert, R.M. and J.G. March (1963). A Behavioral Theory of The Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
Prentice Hall.
DeAlessi, L. (1973). “Private Property and Dispersion of Ownership in Large Corporations.”
Journal of Finance (September): 839-851.
Debreu, Gerard (1959). Theory of Value. New York, John Wiley & Sons.
Demsetz, Harold (1967). “Toward a Theory of Property Rights.” American Economic Review
LVII (May): 347-359.
Jensen and Meckling
74
1976
Demsetz, Harold (1969). “Information and Efficiency: Another Viewpoint.” Journal of Law and
Economics  XII (April): 1-22.
Diamond, P.A. (1967). “The Role of Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model with
Technological Uncertainty.” American Economic Review  LVII (September): 759-776.
Evans, J.L. and S.H. Archer (1968). “Divesification and the Reduction of Dispersion: An
Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Finance (December).
Fama, Eugene F. (1970a). “Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work.”
Journal of Finance  XXV, no. 2 .
Fama, Eugene F. (1970b). “Multiperiod Consumption-investment Decisions.” American
Economic Review  LX (March).
Fama, Eugene F. (1972). “Ordinal and Measurable Utility”. Studies in the Theory of Capital
Markets. M. C. Jensen. New York, Praeger.
Fama, Eugene F.  and M. Miller (1972). The Theory of Finance. New York, Hold, Rhinehart,
and Winston.
Friedman, Milton (1970). The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits. New
York Times Magazine: 32 FF.
Furubotn, E.G. and S. Pejovich (1972). “Property Rights and Economic Theory: A Survey of
Recent Literature.” Journal of Economic Literature  X (December): 1137-1162.
Galai, D.  and R.W. Masulis (1976). “The Option Pricing Model and the Risk Factor of Stock.”
Journal of Financial Economics  3 no. 1/2 : 53-82.
Hakansson, N.H. (1974a). Ordering Markets and the Capital Structures of Firms with
Illustrations. Institute of Business and Economic Working Paper no. 24. Berkley, CA,
University of California.
Hakansson, N.H. (1974b). The Superfund: Efficient Paths Toward a Complete Financial Market,
Unpublished.
Heckerman, D.G. (1975). “Motivating Managers to Make Investment Decision.” Journal of
Financial Economics  2 no. 3 : 273-292.
Hirschleifer, Jack (1958). “On the Theory of Optimal Investment Decisions.” Journal of
Political Economy (August): 329-352.
Hirschleifer, Jack (1970). Investment, Interest, and Capital. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-
Hall.
Jensen, Michael C. (1969). “Risk, the Pricing of Capital Assets, and the Evaluation of Investment
Portfolios.” Journal of Business  42, no. 2 : 167-247.
Jensen and Meckling
75
1976
Jensen, Michael C. (1979). “Tests of Capital Market Theory and Implications of the Evidence.”
Handbook of Financial Economics .
Jensen, Michael C. and J.B. Long (1972). “Corporate Investment under Uncertainty and Pareto
Optimality in the Capital Markets.” Bell Journal of Economics (Spring): 151-174.
Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling (1978). “Can the Corporation Survive?” Financial
Analysts Journal (January-February).
Klein, W.A. (1976). Legal and Economic Perspectives on the FIrm. Unpublished manuscript.
Los Angeles, CA, University of California.
Kraus, A. and R. Litzenberger (1973). “A State Preference Model of Optimal Financial
Leverage.” Journal of Finance (September).
Larner, R.J. (1970). Management Control and the Large Corporation. New York, Dunellen.
Lintner, J. (1965). “Security Prices, Risk, and Maximal Gains from Diversification.” Journal of
Finance  XX (December): 587-616.
Lloyd-Davies, Peter R. (1975). “Optimal Financial Policy in Imperfect Markets.” Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 10 (3): 457ff.
Long, J.B. (1972). “Wealth, Welfare, and the Price of Risk.” Journal of Finance (May): 419-
433.
Long, J.B. (1974). “Discussion.” Journal of Finance  XXXIX, no. 12 : 485-188.
Machlup, F. (1967). “Theories of the Firm: Marginalist, Behavioral, Managerial.” American
Economic Review (March): 1-33.
Manne, H.G. (1962). “The ‘Higher Criticism’ of the Modern Corporation.” Columbia Law
Review  62 (March): 259-284.
Manne, H.G. (1965). “Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control.” Journal of Political
Economy (April): 110-120.
Manne, H.G. (1967). “Our Two Corporate Systems: Law and Economics.” Virginia Law Review
53 (March): 259-284.
Manne, H.G. (1972). “The Social Responsibility of Regulated Utilities.” Wisconsin Law Review
V, no. 4 : 995-1009.
Marris, R. (1964). The Economic Theory of Managerial Capitalism. Glencoe, IL, Free Press of
Glencoe.
Mason, E.S. (1959). The Corporation in Modern Society. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University
Press.
Jensen and Meckling
76
1976
McManus, J.C. (1975). “The Costs of Alternative Economic Organizations.” Canadian Journal
of Economics  VII (August): 334-350.
Meckling, William H. (1976). “Values and the Choice of the Model of the Individual in the Social
Sciences.” Schweizerische Zeitschrift fur Volkswirtschaft (December).
Merton, R.C. (1973). “The Theory of Rational Option Pricing.” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science  4, no. 1 : 141-183.
Merton, R.C. (1974). “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates.”
Journal of Finance XXIX, no. 2 : 449-470.
Merton, R.C. and M.G. Subrahmanyam (1974). “The Optimality of a Competitive Stock Market.”
Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science (Spring): 145-170.
Miller, M.H. and F. Modigliani (1966). “Some Estimates of the Cost of Capital to the Electric
Utility Industry, 1954-57.” American Economic Review  48 (June): 333-391.
Modigliani, F.  and M.H. Miller (1958). “The Costs of Capital, Corporate Finance, and the Theory
of Investment.” American Economic Review  48 (June): 261-297.
Modigliani, F.  and M.H. Miller (1963). “Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of Capital: A
Correction.” American Economic Review 53 (June): 433-443.
Monson, R.J. and A. Downs (1965). “A Theory of Large Managerial Firms.” Journal of
Political Economy (June): 221-236.
Myers, Stewart C. (1975). A Note on the Determinents of Corporate Debt Capacity.
Unpublished manuscript. London, London Graduate School of Business.
Penrose, E. (1958). The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. New York, Wiley.
Preston, L.E. (1975). “Corporation and Society: The Search for a Paradigm.” Journal of
Economic Literature  XIII (June): 434-453.
Ross, Steven A. (1973). “The Economic Theory of Agency: The Principal’s Problems.”
American Economic Review  LXII (May): 134-139.
Ross, S.A. (1974a). “The Economic Theory of Agency and the Principle of Similarity”. Essays
on Economic Behavior under Uncertainty. M. D. B. e. al. Amsterdam, North-Holland.
Ross, S.A. (1974b). Options and Efficiency. Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research
Working Paper no. 3074. Philadelphia, PA, University of Pennsylvania.
Rubenstein, M. (1974). A Discrete-Time Synthesis of Financial Theory, Parts I and II. Intstitute
of Business and Economic Research. Berkeley, CA, University of California.
Scitovsky, T. (1943). “A Note of Profit Maximisation and its Implications.” Review of Economic
Studies  XI : 57-60.
Jensen and Meckling
77
1976
Sharpe, W.F. (1964). “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions of
Risk.” Journal of Finance  XIX (September): 425-442.
Shubik, M (1970). “A Curmudgeon’s Guide to Microeconomics.” Journal of Economic
Literature  VIII (June): 405-434.
Silver, M. and R. Auster (1969). “Entrepreneurship, Profit, and Limits on Firm Size.” Journal of
Business  42 (July): 277-281.
Simon, Herbert A. (1955). “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics  69 : 99-118.
Simon, Herbert A. (1959). “Theories of Decision Making in Economics and Behavioral Science.”
American Economic Review (June): 253-283.
Smith, Adam (1776). The Wealth of Nations. Edited by Edwin Cannan, 1904. Reprint edition
1937. New York, Modern Library.
Smith, Clifford W., Jr. (1976). “Option Pricing: A Review.” Journal of Financial Economics  2
no. 1/2 : 3-52.
Warner, Jerold B. (1977). “Bankruptcy, Absolute Priority, and the Pricing of Risky Debt Claims.”
Journal of Financial Economics   4 : 239-76.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1964). The Economics of Discretionary Behavior: Managerial
Objectives in a Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1970). Corporate Control and Business Behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
Prentice-Hall.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications.
New York, Free Press.
Wilson, R. (1968). “On the Theory of Syndicates.” Econometrica  36 (January): 119-132.
Wilson, R. (1969). “La Decision: Agregation et Dynamique des Orders de Preference”. Editions
du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. Paris, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique: 288-307.
Wytmar (1974). . Wall Street Journal.